


**Absorption --** A state of unself-conscious envelopment or immersion.
See *cathexis, ecstasy, enstasy, infusion.*

**Active imagination --** A practice in Jungian psychology whereby
imagery is deliberately engaged as though one were participating in
one's dreams while awake. It is used to bridge the gap between
the conscious and unconscious minds. Active imagination can be achieved
naturally during intense states of relaxation such as when listening to
a story or drifting off to sleep.

**Active coping --** Finding some aspect of a stressor that one can do
something about and formulating a plan of action to respond to it.

**Active listening --** A particular form of listening and
a communication technique used in counselling, training and conflict
resolution, which requires the listener to feed back what they hear to
the speaker, by way of re-stating or paraphrasing what they have heard
in their own words, to confirm what they have heard and moreover, to
confirm the understanding of both parties. See also *Deep listening*.

**Adler, Alfred --** An Austrian medical doctor, psychotherapist, and
founder of the school of individual psychology. His emphasis on the
importance of feelings of inferiority, the inferiority complex, is
recognized as an isolating element which plays a key role in personality
development. See life task

**Affect --** A feeling state becomes an **affect** when it is
observable, for example, as overall demeanor or tone and modulation of
voice. **Affect** is to be distinguished from mood, which refers to a
pervasive and sustained emotion. Common examples of **affect** are
euphoria, anger, and sadness.

**Aggression --**  From Latin **agere** : to set in motion. Aggression
denotes the **ability to go after what one wants.** Aggression is simply
'moving toward' something. It is the opposite of passive, which denotes
a waiting for someone to fulfil the want. Aggression results from the
flow of excitation into the muscular system, especially into the large
muscles of the back, the legs and the arms. These muscles are involved
in standing and moving. Aggression is also the force that enables us to
meet, stand up to and handle stress. **Anger** **can be distinguished
from aggression** in that anger aims at setting or protecting a limit.
Aggression can be distorted, and one of these distortions can
be ***violence**.* Violence, broadly defined, is imposing one's will on
another. More narrowly violence is harming another. The confusion of
aggression with violence is a large part why aggression is
distrusted. Another distortion of aggression is
**passive-aggression**.  *Passive*--*aggressive* behavior is
characterized by a pattern of passive hostility and an avoidance of
direct communication. See *Anger*

**Alienation --** A pervasive sense of being disconnected from the
world. Primary expressions of alienation are deanimation of the
self-representation, depersonalization of the body, and derealization of
the world. Alienation is frequently associated with midlife transition.
See *deanimation, depersonalization, derealization.*

**Anima --** Anima (Latin, "soul"). The **unconscious, feminine side of
a man's personality**. She is personified in dreams by images of women
ranging from prostitute and seductress to spiritual guide (Wisdom). She
is the eros principle, hence a man's anima development is reflected in
how he relates to women. Identification with the anima can appear as
moodiness, effeminacy, and oversensitivity. Jung calls the anima the
archetype of life itself. A personified representation (imago) of the
undeveloped feminine potential in a man. See *soul*, a*nimus, archetype,
Jung*

**Animus --** Animus (Latin, "spirit"). The **unconscious, masculine
side of a woman's personality**. He personifies the logos principle.
Identification with the animus can cause a woman to become rigid,
opinionated, and argumentative. More positively, he is the inner man who
acts as a bridge between the woman's ego and her own creative resources
in the unconscious. A personified representation (imago) of the
undeveloped masculine potential in a woman. According to Jung, romantic
love results when a man or woman projects their anima or animus onto
another, and then falls in love with their own reflection. Because this
projection process is easily derailed when characteristics that don't
fit our ideal man or woman surface, we instinctively try to hide our
true self, in order to maintain the attraction. See *soul*, *Anima,
Archetype, Jung*

**Anger --** Anger is a creative emotion that is predominantly driven by
the limbic system. Unlike the cerebral cortex which makes up our
thinking, evaluative more rational part of the brain, the limbic system
is emotional and reactive. Anger as a natural emotional response, plays
a primary role in the reduction of emotional and physical distress.
Children protest and become angry against environmental frustrations
such as the denial by caregivers of their basic needs, boundaries being
violated or connections being broken. The fight or flight response is
part of this system. Anger as the fight part of the fight/flight system
motivates fighting for survival. Fear equals the flight part. When anger
is overtaken by fear or fright  a person may exhibit gestures and
impulses that indicate that they are about to direct their anger
inwardly. For example, you may have your fist balled up and be preparing
to strike in the direction of the attacker and it becomes apparent that
the gesture has a tendency to move toward the self rather than toward
the object. **Anger in the context of spiritual development** serves our
higher self when we stand up for our truth and when we use it to fuel
our passion to create. But when acted out, it serves to keep us out of
connection with others. The idea of **learning to deal with anger** is
to be able to use it productively. In therapy interactive expression is
often used, enhanced by specialized role-playing, called accommodation
that provides satisfaction of all emotions.  The visceral concomitants
of anger (as well as fear, joy, sadness or whatever), dancing on and in
body surfaces is invited and allowed to be born in therapy as full
motoric expression of conscious emotions. It is not the goal to walk
around angry all the time. Regular work with anger is therefore part of
a continued purification process in personal development and
self-actualization. See *higher self, aggression.*

**Antidote --** The healing (antidotal) interaction provided by the
ideal figures to counter the toxic effects of the negative history
experienced with the original historic figures. The antidote usually
provides directly opposite or contrasting elements found in the negative
event. For instance, if the original parents were alcoholic, then the
ideal parents would be sober; if the originals were abusive, the ideals
would be respectful and loving, etc. Antidotal interactions are part of
building a new synthetic memory in the brain. See synthetic memory

**Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) --** The **autonomic nervous
system** is a component of the peripheral **nervous system** that
regulates involuntary physiologic processes including heart rate, blood
pressure, respiration, digestion, and sexual arousal. It contains three
anatomically distinct divisions: sympathetic, parasympathetic and
enteric. See *polyvagal theory, armor.*

**Anxiety --** An emotional experience which may be felt in a situation
which at once contains the promise of pleasure coupled with a threat of
pain. Anxiety is an emotional perception of the organism as it is
constricted by a contraction against expansion. Anxiety needs to be
distinguished from fear, even though they are closely related. Although
both are alerting signals, they appear to prepare the body
for **different** actions. **Anxiety** is a generalized response to an
unknown threat or internal conflict, whereas **fear** is focused on
known external danger. Thus, fear is anxiety that is attached to a
specific thing or circumstance. Anxiety is seen as a diffuse, a kind of
unfocused, objectless, future-oriented fear. See *Fear*

**Archetype.** C. G. Jung's term for **inherited patterns of imaginal
projection**. Jung described archetypes as primordial images that have
existed from the remotest times, but images that lack clear content.
Jung recognized two basic layers in the unconscious---the personal
unconscious, whose contents are derived from present lifetime
experience, and the collective unconscious, whose contents are inherited
and essentially universal within the species. **The collective
unconscious consists of archetypes.** Their specific content as realized
images is supplied by the material of conscious experience. Thus, the
archetype as such is an empty form that must be inferred, or derived by
abstraction, from a class of experienced images or symbols. Symbolically
represented as the stereotyped characters of myth, fable, and
literature. The archetypes to which Jung devoted the greatest amount of
attention in his writings include the shadow, the anima and animus, the
wise old man, the magna mater (or great earth mother), the child, and
the self (Jung, 1968). In Bodymind Integration, Jung's theory of
archetypes is adopted generally but applied sparingly. Only a few
archetypes are addressed. See *Dynamic Ground, Great Mother, nonegoic
potentials, shadow, animus, anima.*

**Armor --** Armor, as the concept formulated by Wilhelm Reich, is a
medical, not a metaphorical or philosophical concept. It is the total
pattern of chronic muscular tension in the body as a defense against the
breakthrough of emotions, movements and vegetative (autonomic)
sensations, especially anxiety, rage, and sexual ex­citation. The term is
functional identical with **character armor**. With armor in place, the
conscious control no longer has to actively defend against certain
impulses or desires. As tenacious as psychological defenses tend to be,
they can still slip or be overwhelmed at times, but armor tends to be
'always on.'  *"The armor is comprised of those organs and muscle groups
which have functional contact with each other and which are capable of
accompanying each other in emotional expressive movement"* (Reich,
Character Analysis). It involves the ANS, usually but not always the
sympathetic branch. Since the ANS regulates vascular tone and blood
flow, the tone of the ANS affects every organ of the body, including the
brain. This is just one illustration of the profound effects of ANS
tone, and has obvious physiological and medical implications. See
*Character Armor*. *ANS, Reich*

**Armoring:** Armoring may be divided into **natural or temporary**
muscular contraction and **permanent or chronic** contraction. The
former occurs in any living animal when it is threatened, but is given
up when the threat is no longer present. The latter originates in the
same manner, but because of continued threats is maintained and becomes
chronic, reacting eventually to permanent inner rather than
environmental dangers. (Elsworth Baker, Man in the Trap,
1967).  Armoring alters the energy economy of the body. It functions to
bind energy or to resist flow of energy, thereby lowering the natural
pulsation and decreasing the overall life force of the organism. See
*emotions, character armoring*

**Arousal --** A nervous system that is used to being in hyper-arousal
is called **"global high intensity activation" (GHIA).** It is used to
refer to organisms whose baselines have trended upwards into
hyperarousal (Foundation for Human Enrichment, 2007). In hypo-arousal,
Similarly, the term **"functional freeze"** is used for organisms whose
baselines have trended downwards into hypoarousal (Foundation for Human
Enrichment, 2007; Levine, 2010). They will use particular strategies to
lift themselves up out that state.

**Association(s).** Experienc(es) that come to mind, including memories
and fantasies, that link emotionally to the topic under discussion. That
topic may be a symptom or a pathological character trait. A spontaneous
flow of interconnected thoughts and images around a specific idea,
determined by unconscious connections.

**Attunement.** Alignment of the therapist and clients' emotional states
so that each can experience the other's subjective world. This permits
the sense of emotional communication and connection often described as
"being together" and "feeling felt." The nonverbal signs of eye contact,
body gestures, facial expressions, and tone of voice communicate the
state of mind of each member of a dyad through the orbitofrontal
cerebral cortex. Neurophysiological mechanisms use these stimuli to
integrate several domains of the human experience, including emotional
regulation, response flexibility, consciousness, social relationships,
and the evaluation of meaning. Misattunements lead to emotional
dysregulation, which require **"interactive repair"** through a
sufficient number of beneficial interpersonal experiences for the person
to achieve or regain emotional regulation.

**Auto-immune --** Put simply, autoimmunity is when your body has an
inappropriate immune reaction toward itself or certain organs and
tissues within the body --- basically, the immune system attacks the
body rather than protecting it. This triggers a cascade of inflammation
and causes many debilitating symptoms. For years, doctors and scientists
believed autoimmune conditions were a result of genetic factors.
However, recent research has uncovered other potential factors ---
particularly the influence of toxins on autoimmune diseases. Research
shows also that emotional stress is associated with autoimmune disease
development. Stress is shown to impact the immune system, gut health,
and other processes in the body, all of which may influence autoimmune
disease development.

**Awareness --** *'**Aware*****'** stems from
the *Anglo-Saxon* **'gewaer'** (11th century) which meant something like
'being informed', 'to know' from the 13th century onwards. The original
meaning of awareness relates to **the having of experiences**, the
experiencing itself. **Consciousness can be seen a specific form of
awareness.** The etymologic origin of 'consciousness' is composed of the
Latin words 'cum and sciere' and could be translated as 'to know ABOUT',
which points to some reflexive properties of consciousness, that is to
the considering of experiences. **Daniel Stern**'s in The Present Moment
(2004, pp 112-121), develops the concepts of **"Explicit" and "Implicit"
consciousness**. "Explicit" consciousness refers to the dimension of
consciousness that is clear and lucid. Awareness, to most of us, means
explicit conscious awareness, light, and clarity. "Implicit"
consciousness, in contrast, is vague, subtle, difficult to define and
intuitive. Newborns are prone to lapse into disengaged, inwardly
absorbed states when attention-commanding stimuli disappear from
awareness. They can be seen as 'subconscious" or "subaware". Newborns
certainly have no awareness[ ]{.s6}of an independently existing external
world. From vagueness and cognitive dormancy, they struggle to focus
their attention on their experience passing through the developmental
stages towards maturity.  The **Gestalt model of consciousness** --
figure and background -- helps us conceptualize how an integration of
perception, thought, emotions, memory and action strategies happen as
sequence of becoming aware and finally conscious. That which is not
uppermost -- only vaguely -- in awareness (implicit consciousness),
provides the **context** and **is the source from which figures (clearly
and lucidly)** **emerge and become prominent in awareness** (explicit
consciousness). Since our experience is a process partly made up of
conflict, our focus in never immediately sharp. 


To construct a simile, a fish swimming in a crater lake of a dormant
volcano has no explicit conscious awareness of the prodigious energy
that lies dormant beneath the floor of the lake, and it has no explicit
awareness even of the water in which it swims. The water in which the
fish swims is a transparent medium, not an object of which the fish is
aware. The fish swims through the water and sees things in the water but
does not---or only rarely, when the water is turbulent---notice the
water itself (as explicit). See *Gestalt, Consciousness*






**Background --** As distinguished in Gestalt from figure or foreground,
that which is not uppermost in awareness. Provides the context and is
the source from which figures emerge and become prominent in awareness.
See *Gestalt, Awareness*

**Basic Needs --** According to Al & Diane Pesso, people have five basic
emotional needs: place,  nurturance (oral/tactile), support, protection,
and limits. Basic needs  must be satisfied by parents during childhood
in order for a child's ego to develop and for the child to be and become
his or her true self.

- **Place --** The provision to a child of a literal and then
  psychological/metaphoric place in the body of the mother, then lives,
  hearts and minds of both parents. This is first provided by the
  uterus, then after birth by the arms of the parents and rooms
  available in the homes of the parents.  In later years this translates
  into psychological spaces such as the heart and minds of the
  parents. The provision of place recognizes the value of the child in
  having a right to live in the world as the child actually is.  It
  implies the child being "seen" and valued for what it is and not
  over-run as if it were not present.
- **Nurturance** -- The act of caring for those infant needs that
  literally sustain life -- such as nursing, feeding, grooming, washing,
  petting, caressing, etc.  In later years this translates or transposes
  into symbolic feeding and grooming in a way that psychologically
  sustains life -- such as giving "strokes", valuing, appreciating,
  admiring, etc. See *nurturing breath*
- **Support** -- The act of supporting and carrying about an infant too
  young to hold itself upright and move about.  The arms and laps of the
  parents provide this support.  In later years this translates into
  psychological support, as in "backing" up, or standing behind", etc.
- **Protection** -- The act of defending the soft vulnerability of an
  infant against physical injury by parents providing the hard shield of
  their own bodies between the infant and possible contact or impact
  with hard or dangerous surfaces.  In later years this translates into
  psychological defense or protection, as in blocking verbal or
  psychological injury.
- **(Loving) Limits** -- The act of physically restraining or
  constraining the infant or older child from doing damage to itself,
  others or valuable objects.  In later years this translates into
  verbal or psychological limits. See *boundaries*

**Being-in-the-World --** Heidegger's term for human existence. This
existence is supposed to be oriented towards more growth and meaning.
The being is meant to become a state rather than just an activity, while
the world in human life means more than just the environment or the
objective occurrence of mere things.

**Belief --** One's basic understandings of oneself, one's world, and
other people.

**Bioenergetic Analysis --** A system of psychotherapy developed by
Alexander Lowen and John C. Pierrakos. The therapy integrates physical
work with psychoanalytic techniques. See *Core Energetics*

**Bioenergetics --** The commonly used name for the body of theory and
system of exercises developed by Alexander Lowen and John C. Pierrakos.
Bioenergetics is one type of psychotherapy in which the personality is
studied in terms of the energetic processes of the body. The goal is to
help people regain their primary nature, which is the condition of being
free, the state of being graceful. See *freedom, Reich*

**Bioenergetic Theory --** Bioenergetic theory deals directly with the
human personality in terms of feeling and expression. The theory becomes
the framework for a group of techniques which are or­iented toward
working out inhibiting blocks which undermine the person's capacity for
feeling and expression.

**Bioenergy --** The energy in the living organism which provides the
ability for functioning. See *Energy*.

**Bliss --** The natural state of a unified being in harmony with itself
and the universe.

**Block(s):** A block in Reichian terms is a defense pattern developed
in response to a perceived threat or traumatic experience. Examples of
blocks: contracted muscles, cold spots in the body, places where the
skin is very pale, constricted parts in your body, parts where there is
a lot of fat, twists, etc. Blocks are places in the body that resist
energy and flow of energy, holding back unresolved feelings which resist
becoming conscious and resist change. When pressure is put on blocks
through a charging activity, feelings held in the block can become
available and conscious. See *armor*

**Body ego --** The body-identified ego of the preoedipal child who has
not yet discovered private psychic space (prepersonal body ego). The
body ego is to be distinguished from the mental ego. See *mental ego*

**Bodymind  --** Refers to **"**Being a body" : Body and mind are
functionally identical systems (a bodymind). In this sense the term
refers to the inseparable unity and synergy \[functional identity\]
between body & mind in a person. Wilhelm Reich emphasized the holistic
aspect of this philosophy: *"My present theory of the identity and unity
of psycho-physical functioning originated in Bergsonian thinking, and
has become a new theory of the functional relationship between body and
mind"* (Reich, 1942/1973, pp. 23-24). Consequently, character armoring
is therefore to be seen as functionally identical with muscular
\[hypertension\]. Reich says: "*The concept, "functional identity,"
which I had to introduce means nothing more than that muscular attitudes
and character attitudes have the same function in the psychic mechanism:
they can replace one another and can be influenced by one another.
Basically, they cannot be separated. They are identical in their
function."* (Reich, 1973, pp. 270--271). Alfred Adler describes this
psychophysical unity in a similar way: *"The findings of individual
psychology point to the fact that a persons' behavioral forms all fall
into a whole and that they are an expression of the lifestyle of that
individual. The so-called conscious and the unconscious are not
contradictory but form a single entity"* (Adler, 1929d, p.87).

**Body-Mind --** Refers to** **"Having a body" -- Body and mind are seen
as two systems, which complement one another (body -- mind).

**Body Reading --** * *Body Reading in body psychotherapy is based on the
concept that structure is frozen function. What this means is that a
person's physical structure is a reflection of his psycho-biological
history and his current psycho-biological functioning. Think of a
physical structure molded by the experiences of life. That is a
continuous process, in which the body structure evolves with the
experiences in interaction with the physical and social worlds that
intervene. Body structure can be seen as a frozen conversation or
dialogue between conflicting parts of the self. The conversation was
frozen because one part had gained the upper hand, and a balance
disturbed in the direction of fragility or or a burdened. What was once
an active struggle between individual and environment, and then between
parts of the self, became institutionalized in physical behavior and
structure. There exist different forms of [body
reading](https://www.bodymind-integration.com/body-reading-the-hi-stories-that-bodies-tell/){target="_blank"
rel="noopener noreferrer"} : with or without a typology. See *character
structure*

**Body Schema**  -- The set of enduring dispositions and capacities
responsible for our intuitive sense of bodily position and possibility
(not to be confused with body image).

**Bogginess --** A tissue texture abnormality characterized by a
palpable sense of sponginess in the tissue, interpreted as resulting
from congestion caused by increased fluid content.

**Boundaries --** Energetic limits between a person's Core self and the
environment. Healthy Boundaries allow us to be energetically separate
from the world yet be in harmonious interaction with it. Healthy
boundaries are flexible and strong. They allow us to come close when we
can and stay distant when the energy is too much. Unhealthy Boundaries
are rigid, weak or brittle. Person feels at the mercy of others,
victimized, too flexible. Has a difficult balance in giving and
receiving. See *basic needs*

**Breaks --** are places on the body, usually at joints, where one may
see a "break" in the flow of energy. An example of this would be if
someone has extremely thin, weak looking ankles in comparison to the
rest of their leg. This could indicate a "break" in the flow of energy
from the body to the ground, leaving the person more likely to
experience feeling ungrounded. See *ungrounded, grounding*





**Catharsis --** The word catharsis is derived from the Greek
word **Katharsis **which is translated as 'cleansing' or 'purification'.
Most of the definitions emphasize two essential components of catharsis:
the emotional aspect (strong emotional expression and processing) and
the cognitive aspect of catharsis (insight, new realization, and the
unconscious becoming consciousness) and as a result -- positive change.
In Aristotle's "Poetics", it meant the emotional release and cleansing
that spectators experience during and after watching a tragedy, which
has a corrective and healing effect. The fact that there existed those
who could suffer a worse fate than them was to them a relief, and at the
end of the play, they felt *ekstasis* (literally, astonishment), from
which the modern word exstasis and ecstacy are derived. The concept of
catharsis has been **widely used in modern psychotherapy**, starting
with Breuer and Freud. The term *catharsis* has been adopted to describe
the act of expressing, or more accurately, *experiencing* the deep
emotions often associated with repressed memories of traumatic events in
the individual's past which had originally been adequately addressed or
experienced due to defense mechanisms such as repression or denial. Some
modern therapeutic modalities emphasize the value of expression of
repressed emotions and use catharsis as the essential tool for the
positive therapeutic change. While the supporters of
cognitive-behavioral approaches dominate the field of psychology, most
of the contemporary schools underestimate the importance of catharsis.
They consider affect regulation as the primary goal, therefore leaving
full emotional release in the periphery or often perceiving it as a
negative direction. The complexity of phenomenon of catharsis (it is
not  just 'venting anger') involves experiencing repressed emotional
traumas within safe and supportive environment, involving emotional
discharge, as well as appropriate cognitive processing and insight. See
*purification*





**Cathexis --** English translation of **Besetzung**, Freud's term for
the investment of psychic energy in an object (idea, image, etc.). A
cathexis, in charging an object with energy, makes the object a salient
if not compelling attractor of consciousness. A distinction can be made
between object and energy cathexes: whereas an object cathexis is an
investment of consciousness-attracting energy in an object, an energy
cathexis is a concentration (a massing or pooling) of
consciousness-attracting energy without a targeted object. Both object
and energy cathexes attract consciousness and can absorb the ego. See
*absorption, countercathexis, ecstasy, enstasy, infusion.*





**Centering --** The idea of a centre is both metaphorical and literal,
referring equally to a centre of the self and a centre of the body. This
centre is generally understood to be in the viscera and the nerve plexi
of the guts. According to David Boadella, a body psychotherapist, the
therapeutic work of centering is concerned with re-establishing a
functioning rhythm in the flow of metabolic energy and the balance
between the two halves of the vegetative \[autonomic\] nervous system.
In practice this means to help towards recovering emotional balance and
harmonious breathing. According to Charles Kelley, centering is an
inward movement, first of all away from all demands, responsibilities
and needs of the outer world. It is a concentration process, a focussing
towards the inner world, the inner self. Your center is the place where
your inner strength comes from.

**Charge --** The bioenergetic view is that energy builds up (charges)
and is discharged in the body constantly. When it becomes impossible to
charge any longer, discharge happens spontaneously. Based on a
mechanical model of energy and on an economic model of supply and
demand, the term "Energy Economy" connotes the balance between energetic
charge and discharge in an organism. As in market economy, it is
important for the organism that there is a balance in how much energy
comes into the body and how much energy is lost. "Charge" describes the
energetic load of the healthy organism."Discharge" is the successful
release of charge. Charging the organism energetically happens by
activating muscular contraction, like certain forms of hitting, kicking,
jumping, shaking, forced breathing. Charging techniques deepen the
breathing and facilitate the intake of energy. It is necessary to charge
the system in order to have energy to discharge or build more charge. An
See *discharge*, *energy economy*, *energetic cycle *

**Character --** A fixed pattern of behavior, the typical way an
individual handles his striving for pleasure, or habitual behavior.

**Character analysis --** Originally a modification of the traditional
Freudian psychoanalytic technique, which was introduced by Wilhelm
Reich, MD (medical doctor). He put defense mechanisms in the center of
analysis and not the symptoms and the disclosure of their unconscious
content. Instead of symptom analysis, Reich expanded resistance analysis
into the more inclusive technique of character analysis, in which the
sum total of typical **character** **attitudes** developed by an
individual as a blocking against emotional excitations became the object
of treatment. The discovery of *muscular armoring*, however, lead
gradually to the development of a new technique, called
characteranalytic vegetotherapy. See *character attitude, vegetotherapy,
posture, Wilhelm Reich*

**Character Attitude --** "By 'character attitude' we mean the total
expression of the organism. This is literally identical with the total
impression which the organism makes on us." (Wilhelm Reich, 1942, The
Function of the Orgasm, New York: Noonday Press, pages 363-364). see
*posture*

**Character Structure --** The individual's character which is
structured in his body in the form of chronic and gen­erally unconscious
muscular tensions that block impulses to reach out, grow or change
significantly. Character structure is also a psychic attitude which is
buttressed by a system of denials, rationalizations and projections and
geared to an ego ideal that affirms its value.

**Character Styles --** The 5 classical character styles as described by
Alexander Lowen and John C. Pierrakos.

- **The Schizoid Character style** is usually described as a personality
  that has a good deal of anxiety and often has difficulty knowing how
  they feel. Their most common defense in stressful situations is to
  dissociate or to withdraw. They often are disconnected from their
  feelings and cannot identify how they feel. They can have difficulty
  sustaining social contact for long periods and can have issues
  trusting others. They often experience a great deal of fear about
  social interactions and can use intellectual abilities to keep
  themselves in contact with others without really having to make
  connections on a true emotional level. On an energetic level they tend
  to be undercharged and ungrounded.
- **The Oral Character style** is usually described as a personality
  that has issues with needs. They may have a fear of not getting their
  needs met or of being abandoned. Sometimes they overcompensate for
  these fears by denying they have needs of any kind.
- **The Psychopathic Character style** is usually described as a
  personality with a great deal of self-will and determination. This
  person experienced one or both of their parents as needing them to be
  more than they actually were able to be as a child. So they are
  generally competitive and high achievers. They have a strong drive to
  win or dominate the situation and can sometimes appear aggressive or
  controlling. They may have difficulty having true empathy yet they are
  often quite charming and popular with others. Energetically people
  with this character style have a great deal of energy than can become
  overcharged in the upper part of the body.
- **The Masochistic Character style** is usually described as a
  personality that was forced to submit to the will of the parents
  during their "terrible twos" in a fashion that was overbearing and
  ultimately left the toddler feeling defeated and humiliated. As adults
  they continue to submit, and will appear to be trying to please, but
  underneath they are holding resentment. They can seem compliant, but
  will be negative, passive-aggressive or undermining to assert some
  modicum of resistance to compliance. They long to freely express
  themselves, but hold back out of fear of humiliation. This holding
  back leads to spite and they are generally seen by others as
  "complainers". Energetically this person usually holds in their energy
  and can become overcharged. This is typically a person who needs to
  discharge but resists this need.
- **The Rigid Character Style** is described as the personality that
  puts a high priority on appearance: to others and himself. Success,
  attractiveness, competence and control are how this person tends to
  measure themselves and others. This personality can have streaks of
  perfectionism, or in extreme cases Obsessive-Compulsive tendencies.
  They put a great deal of their energy into trying to never make a
  mistake. This is usually a person that functions well in our Western
  society and appears to have a great deal of social savvy. Of the five
  character styles, this is the personality with the most integration of
  their energy. They are perceived as having good energy although they
  may seem restrained. They generally split their energy, keeping the
  energy in the upper body (heart and head) separate from the energy in
  the lower half of the body (pelvis and legs).

**Character types** -- "Character types are differentiated
psychologically by their ego structure, by their attitude towards
reality. Bio energetically, they may be differentiated by their genital
function. The Oral and Masochistic characters are pregenital types:
their contact with genitality is insecure, their attitude towards
reality is infantile or childish. Both are unarmored structures. [\
]{.s1}Accordingly, we must group in one category all character forms
which are grounded in genitality, more or less armored, more or less in
relation to reality. To the degree that a genital character structure is
neurotic, the neurosis will manifest itself as rigidity psychologically
as well as somatically. [\
]{.s1}The genital problem is different for the boy and for the girl.
While the basic disturbance caused by rigidity affects the function of
each sex similarly, the manifest pattern of behavior will differ
according to the sex." *Alexander Lowen. See Character Structure,
Character Styles*

**Chronic muscular tension --** The condition of the body maintained
through the interaction of the central nervous system and the muscular
glandular system processes. Some physical movement may be forbidden in
the environment of an in­dividual. The individual may therefore
voluntarily in­hibit his muscular movement. However if the forbidden
expression must be inhibited indefinitely, conscious control over the
muscle is relinquished to unconscious control. The muscle or muscles
remain constantly contracted. They lack the energy for expansion and
relax­ation. CMT prevents full, natural respiration and de­ creases the
organism's energy level. See *Armor*

**Chronic pain --** Over 6 months, the original nociceptive cause can no
longer explain the duration or severity of the pain.

**Clarification --** Technique for gaining clearer understanding of the
meaning of a patient's conscious (manifest) behavior and experience.

**CNS --** Central nervous system. The CNS includes the brain, spine,
autonomic nervous system (sympathetic and parasympathetic systems.) It
functions in coordination with the body's MGS, and is involved in the
body's sensory, cognitive, and affective perception and behavior.

**Collapse --** Refers to the experience when someone collapses into a
state of low energy. It is an energetic caving-in on ourselves from an
inability to tolerate the level of charge in the body and the feelings
experienced. This is expressed posturally, positionally, (as we lose our
uprightness relative to gravity), closing the spaces in the body
cavities, diminishing the breath and quantity of energy in the body.
This dampens down the feelings. With this is a loss of the sense of our
strength and agency. Collapse is also an inability to contain and a lack
of being grounded in reality. It can look like giving up, being
depressed or falling apart emotionally. It is often accompanied by being
in a younger ego-state. Collapsing happens in an attempt by the organism
to return to the level of charge to which they are accustomed. See
*posture, energy, containment, grounding, ego*

**Collective unconscious --** C. G. Jung's term for the deepest level of
the unconscious, lying beneath the personal level. The collective
unconscious is inherited rather than biographical, universal rather than
specific to any person. See *Dynamic Ground, unconscious. *

**Compensation --** A tendency to make up for underdevelopment of
physical or mental functioning through interest and training, usually
within a relatively normal range of development. Overcompensation
reflects a more powerful impulse to gain an extra margin of development,
frequently beyond the normal range. This may take a useful direction
toward exceptional achievement or a useless direction toward excessive
perfectionism. Genius may result from extraordinary overcompensation.
Undercompensation reflects a less active, even passive attitude toward
development that usually places excessive expectations and demands on
other people.

**Completion --** The full expression / experience of an organic impulse
and the achievement of a boundary.[ ]{.Apple-converted-space}Completion
of an impulse allows a cycle or phase to arrive at fullness. Then life
can go on to the next phase. This happens when previously aborted
somatic and autonomic responses to emerge and fulfill their original
function.[ ]{.Apple-converted-space}We have a predisposition towards
completion (finishing = gestalt). The completion of a self-protective
response is the signal to the nervous system to de-activate. Completion
happens when we can fully be with the total experience. This integration
leads to the ability to listen within, to ourselves, and without, to
others, with greater coherence.

**Complex --** An emotionally charged group of ideas or images. At the
"center" of a complex is an archetype or archetypal image. See
*archetype*

**Confidentiality --** The ethical (and often legal) requirement to
restrict disclosure of client information outside the therapy sessions.

***C*****onflict --** The experience of opposed emotional forces causing
anxiety and generating symptoms and pathological personality traits. It
refers either to **psychic conflict**, which is a struggle between
incompatible or opposing forces within the mind or **external
conflict.** [Psychic conflict]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} may
be between incompatible wishes (e.g., the child's wish to please a
parent and his wish to be in control) or between different psychic
structures or aspects of the mind (e.g., a wish to make a mess might be
opposed by the individual's conscience that upholds values of
cleanliness and order). Sometimes psychic conflict may become
externalized in the individual's effort to avoid anxiety or other
uncomfortable feelings. In this situation a conflict that originates
within the individual is experienced as originating from outside forces
(e.g., the adolescent who is ambivalent about his sexual wishes may
experience himself as unconflicted by imagining that his parent is
opposed to his developing sexuality). [External
conflict]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} describes essential
conflicts that arise between the individual and aspects of the outer
world, when there are incapacities in either the individual or the
environment to meet the other's needs and expectations.

**Confrontation --** Technique of directing a patient's attention to
inner experiences or perceptions of outer reality of which he or she is
conscious or is about to be made conscious.

**Consciousness --** T[hat which I am aware that I am aware of.]{.s1}
Consciousness always includes awareness, but awareness does not have to
include consciousness. Daniel Stern's in **The Present Moment** (2004,
pp 112-121), develops the concepts of "explicit" and "implicit."
**"Explicit" consciousness** refers to the dimension of consciousness
that is clear and lucid. **"Implicit" consciousness**, in contrast, is
vague, subtle, difficult to define and intuitive. See *Awareness*

**Consciousness-raising --** Activities that increase awareness about
how oppressions such as sexism, racism, heterosexism, and ageism
influence the lives of individuals.

**Contact --** a) The experience at the self/environment boundary that
leads to assimilation and growth. Good quality contact involves
awareness and excitement. b)** **The perception of sensation produced by
movement of energy above a certain minimal level plus excitation. See
*ego, awareness, energy*

**Contact boundary --** The dynamic relationship at the meeting point of
self/other, or self/environment. Where experience occurs, and the focus
of therapeutic intervention. See *ego, therapeutic relationship, self*

**Containment --** Is the ability to hold & sustain a considerable level
of energetic charge in the body. TO CONTAIN...means to be able to
tolerate and hold within us the discomfort of certain feelings, without
collapsing, acting-out in reaction, defending, or denying. The ability
to hold energy is in relation to the holding capacity of the organism.
It is related to muscular flexibility and one's ability to sustain
charge and other factors. The human "**container**" is depending on the
person's character foundation, which decides consciousness, how grounded
and how integrated a person is and thus how much energy may run through
the person without creating disturbance. With proper containment, a
person can enjoy a strong sense of oneself, has healthy, flexible
boundaries, does not need to project strong feelings away from
him/herself, does not need muscular armoring and has the physical
ability to fully contract and expand. See *collapsing, acting-out,
defense, energy, character, boundaries, armor*

**Core --** In Wilhelm Reich's terms, the vegetative nervous system from
which involuntary stimuli arise to maintain functioning of the organism.
In Core Energetics (founded by John & Eva Pierrakos), the Core is
understood as Higher Self -- the **c**enter **o**f **r**ight **e**nergy
-- containing soul qualities like power, love and serenity/wisdom. See
*Pierrakos, Reich, Core Energetics, Core Strokes*

**Core Energetics** -- Core Energetics developed by the late Dr. John
Pierrakos MD, a former student of Wilhelm Reich is often identified as
an evolutionary therapy and an approach that bridges body psychotherapy
with spirituality. An outgrowth of bioenergetics, co-founded by
Pierrakos and A. Lowen, Core Energetics emerged from Pierrakos' vision
that sought to integrate not only mind, body, emotions and will, but
also the transpersonal dimension of the human being at a time when
spirituality was often frowned upon in therapeutic circles. See
*bioenergetics*

**Core space --** The area of the body where there is unimpeded
pulsation, i.e., where the system is unarmored. It is from this core
space that energy expands outward into the rest of the body. *, ANS,
pulsation, armoring*

**Core of psyche --** See *psychic core.*

**Core Strokes --** A comprehensive evolutionary process bridging
psychotherapy, spirituality and bodywork in the service of
self-development, developed by Dirk Marivoet, MSc. after 35 years of
experience in psychotherapy, psychomotor therapy, spirituality,
shamanism and bodywork. It works within a relational alliance in order
to connect with and ground in the Core (Center of Right Energy)
Essence. 

**Cycle of Becoming** -- Energy-\>Action-\>Interaction-\>Meaning -- The
four major steps which constitute the way we ideally process the
emotional experiences that happen to us.  In the first step (Energy), we
have an emotional feeling and body response to the experience.  Second
(Action), we express our feelings.  Third  (Interaction), we interact
with the type of people toward whom the emotion seeks to be expressed. 
Fourth (Meaning), we create a conscious and/or unconscious prediction
model regarding how to anticipate and handle similar situations in the
future.





**Dasein ("being-there") --** Heidegger's term to  refer to the
experience of being that is peculiar to human beings. Thus it is a form
of being that is aware of and must confront such issues as personhood,
mortality and the dilemma or paradox of living in relationship with
other humans while being ultimately alone with oneself. Dasein,
being-there, or being-in-the-world implies an involvement in the world.
The world and the human being are co-constituted. The world itself
consists of relationships among entities which, in turn, are only
defined by their interrelationships.

**Deanimation --** The loss of the sense of lived, authentic selfhood.
Deanimation can occur during any developmental stage but is most
characteristic of transitional stages, such as adolescence and midlife
transition. See *alienation, depersonalization, derealization. *

**Deep listening --** Deep Listening involves listening, from a deep,
receptive, and caring place in oneself, to deeper and often subtler
levels of meaning and intention in the other person. It is listening
that is generous, empathic, supportive, accurate, and trusting. Trust
here does not imply agreement, but the trust that whatever others say,
regardless of how well or poorly it is said, comes from something true
in their experience. Deep Listening is an ongoing practice of suspending
self-oriented, reactive thinking and opening one's awareness to the
unknown and unexpected. It calls on a special quality of attention that
poet John Keats called *negative capability*. Keats defined this as
"when a man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries, doubts
without any irritable reaching after fact & reason." See *active
listening*

**Deep psyche --** Term used to refer to the Dynamic Ground as psychic
core, the seat of nonegoic potentials and the deepest level of the
unconscious. See *collective unconscious, Dynamic Ground, nonegoic
potentials, psychic core, unconscious. *

**Deep unconscious --** See *deep psyche*.

**Defense mechanisms --** The automatic, complex, and largely
unconscious operations (e.g., repression, displacement, reaction
formation, projection, etc.) used by the ego as a means of protection
against internal (e.g., unacceptable wishes) or external (e.g., events,
such as a loss, that elicit anxiety or painful affects) danger
situations, aiming at the adaptive restoration of equilibrium. See *ego*

**Defensive behaviors --** Behaviors that people use to cope with an
activity about which they do not feel confident and that limit the
proficiency and/or flexibility of performance.

**Defensive Structures --** The name for a variety of muscular or
psychological attitudes which may exist in the body. They may be
originally shaped and maintained unconsciously. They represent means of
self-protection against a real or imagined threat.

**Depersonalization --** The sense of being alienated from one's
experience. In Bodymind Integration, *depersonalization* is used
primarily to describe the sense of being alienated from one's body and
the corresponding perception of the body as a mere thing.
Depersonalization--- along with deanimation and derealization---belongs
to a group of existential difficulties that can emerge at midlife. See
*alienation, deanimation, derealization. *

**Derealization --** The sense that the world is remote and unreal. A
derealized world seems dead and flat, arid and devoid of positive and
negative values. Derealization--- along with deanimation and
depersonalization---belongs to a group of existential difficulties that
can emerge at midlife. See *alienation, deanimation, depersonalization,
life-world. *

**Diaphragm --** Term used to describe any of several large muscles,
found in humans and other mammals, which separate two adjacent regions
of the body. The most commonly known muscle of this class is the
thoraco-abdominal diaphragm. In humans, the thoraco-abdominal diaphragm
acts as a partition between the cavity of the chest and that of the
abdomen. The chief muscle used in respiration, it is relaxed and
dome-shaped during exhalation. During inhalation it contracts, pulling
downward, and with the combined contraction of the chest muscles allows
the chest cavity to expand.[ ]{.s1}Other diaphragms in the human body
include the pelvic diaphragm and the urogenital diaphragm, which use
similar muscular contractions and expansions in their respective
functions. A "structure" which we empirically experience as a diaphragm
may or may not exist purely anatomically. See *Somatic Centering, Pelvic
Release*

**Diaphragmatic breathing --** Paced breathing exercises used in panic
control treatment to counter hyperventilation and physiologic
hyperarousal.

**Discharge --** refers to the neurogenic release through the ANS, which
attempts to re-regulate the reciprocal action of the Sympathetic and
Parasympathetic nervous system. Discharge is the releasing of built up
energy (sympathetic activation) in the body. Charged energy releases
into the body, carrying tension and feelings that were held. Discharge
results in muscular expansion, can include involuntary movement often
manifesting in the form of vibrations and allowing for release of
feelings. The energy in the discharge flows towards the periphery (away
from the center). See *charge*, *vibration*

**Dreamwork --** The work of the dream mechanisms that disguise or
distort the content of the dream in line with the dream censorship and
transform the latent content emerging from the Dynamic Ground into the
manifest content. See *Dynamic Ground*

**Drive --** the word translates the German "Trieb" because it is closer
to "impulse", "urge", than "instinct". A drive, in psychoanalysis, is a
psychic tendency which assumes a biological source, an object of
discharge, and a specific charge. Generally speaking, drives are linked
with the sexual needs. Two drives were postulated by Freud---sexual and
aggressive. These were the major factors motivating the operation of the
mind in his topographic model. They continue to be considered important
but not the only motivating factors by modern psychoanalysts. See
*aggression, sexuality, topographic model*

**Dualism --** Descartes's view that the mind and body are distinct
substances.

**Dynamic Ground** -- frequently shortened to *Ground* -- Michael
Washburn's term designating the deep core of the psyche and seat of
nonegoic psychic potentials. The Dynamic Ground is the seat of the
deepest level of the unconscious, the inherited or collective
unconscious. **Nature of the Ground** is inherently unconscious in the
sense that its roots extend into neurological structures lying beneath
the limits of possible experience. To use a term introduced by C. G.
Jung, the Dynamic Ground is for this reason a ***psychoid
unconscious***, an underlying depth that reaches beneath the limits of
the psyche into nonpsychic, physical strata. The Dynamic Ground is also
the ***collective unconscious*.** It is accurately described in this way
because it is a source of experience that is inherited and **common to
all members of the species** rather than a psychic formation created as
a consequence of the experience of a single person (In this sense one
can say it is genetic). If the Dynamic Ground is inherently the psychoid
unconscious, it is also the deepest level of the **repressed
unconscious**; for early in life the process of **primal repression**
submerges the Dynamic Ground, significantly weakening the expression of
its plenipotent nonegoic potentials and arresting it at a
**prepersonal** level of expression. It is a reorganization, therefore,
that quietens and reduces -- but not entirely deactivates -- the power
of the Ground to assume the formation of **instinctual drives**,
instinctually organized potential energy: **"sleeping" libido**, the
latent energy of the **id** as described by classical psychoanalysis.
The **power of the Ground is now separated into two markedly different
energies: latent instinctual libido, as the potential energy of the id**
on the one hand and **active psychic energy, as the energy of conscious
processes** on the other : **the ego**, the center of consciousness and
executor of ego functions -- first as body ego and later as mental ego.
In a later stage after **primal separation, which is the act by which
the child withdraws from radical intimacy with the caregiver -- the
tripartite structure of id, ego, and superego** are consolidated at the
**personal level** in the period of transition from the oedipal stage to
the stage of latency (five or six years of age). Although the tripartite
division of the psyche is a fixture of life as we know it, it is not the
original or a necessary organization of the psyche See *ego, ego
functions, nonegoic potentials, psychic core, psychoid unconscious,
unconscious. *





**Ecstasy --** State of euphoric infusive dissolution: rapture,
transport. *"Ecstasy is a feeling that comes only when the heart is
tuned to that pitch of love which melts it, which makes it tender, which
gives it gentleness, which makes it humble."   -Hazrat Inayat Khan, The
Sufi Message; *See *enstasy, infusion. *

**Effectiveness --** The degree to which a treatment produces positive
outcomes in the context in which treatment most often is sought (i.e.,
"real world").

**Ego** -- The Psychological boundaries of a person (skin of the self)
created through interactions with significant others. In the first years
of life ego formation is largely a matter of the baby's brain
internalising the already developed ego of the parents. The ego is
comprised of perhaps hundreds of thousands of memory bits of energy ---
action --- interaction --- meanings sequences that guide our behaviour
in the world. It is primarily a collection of affect regulation programs
that guide our behaviors in our day-to-day living. It is a guardian of
consciousness and energy.The ego is the mediator between the inner and
outer reality of a human being. It entails the consciousness of self and
the intention of self. The ego---also called the *nuclear ego*---is the
executor of **ego functions** (which include self preservation,
perception, motility, learning, memory, cognition, language, reality
testing, and the synthetic function). It "decides" what to let in and
what to put out in terms of historical learning and patterns.  It
attempts to define and assess reality.  It "chooses" what is manifested
as the "I."  It is conditioned by cultural and historic events.  It
works with symbols and abstractions.  Source of consciousness.  It is
the **psychological organ** which makes differentiations such as: self
and other, reality and fantasy, dream and awake, etc**. **It is the
entirety of our learned, or mapped, emotional representations of how to
survive and thrive in the world. [These mappings are implicitly learned
and stored as specific procedural memories called
emotions. ]{.s1}Ideally, the ego serves the Core, supporting the person
to express its unique potential according to its life plan and to love.
Thus the full strength and power of the Core are unfolded. Unlike the
soul, we are not born with an ego, merely, we are born with the
possibility of an ego. Ego is created in our lifetime while the soul
has an evolutionary component.\
The ego is the basis of the larger **ego system**. It is the ego, as
**nuclear ego**, that "has" a self-representation, **ego ideal**, and
**superego**. The ego is to be distinguished from the Dynamic Ground,
the deep core of the psyche and seat of nonegoic potentials. The
healthy, strong ego is able to step aside and surrender to life
according to the Core´s creativity. A person with a healthy ego is
living from its Core. See *body ego, ego functions, ego system, mental
ego, unity of apperception. *

**Ego Defenses of the 5 different Bio-Energetic Character Structures**

- [**Schizoid Ego and Defense** Defenses: fragmentation, dissociation,
  denial, splitting, isolation, withdrawal, fantasy,
  intellectualization, projection]{.s1}
- [**Oral Ego and Defense Defenses:**  regression, displacement,
  idealization, projection, somatisation, repression, rationalisation,
  compensation]{.s1}
- [**Masochistic Ego and Defense Defenses: ** passive aggression,
  reaction formation, self-aggression, undoing, projection,
  suppression]{.s1}
- [**Psychopathic Ego and Defense :** Defenses:  acting out,
  displacement, denial, identification with aggressor, isolation,
  projection]{.s1}
- [**Rigid Ego and Defense :** sublimation, identification,
  intellectualisation, rationalisation, introjection, projection ]{.s1}

**Ego functions --** The primary functions carried out by the nuclear
ego, included among which are synthesis (of competing or disconnected
elements of experience), reality testing, discursive cognition (e.g.,
data organization, conceptual mapping, hypothetico-deductive reasoning),
impulse control, and intentional action. Ego functions are to be
distinguished from the nonegoic potentials of the Dynamic Ground. See
*Dynamic Ground, ego, ego system, nonegoic potentials. *

**Ego ideal --** The portion of superego functions that includes goals,
ideals, and standard of thought and behavior. It is involved in the
experience of self-esteem, pride and shame. see *super ego*

**Egoism --** The thesis that each individual is morally obligated only
to do what is in his or her self-interest.

**Ego psychology --** An offshoot of structural theory developed by
Heinz Hartman and David Rapaport emphasizing the role of the ego in
mental life.

**Ego strength --** A term broadly referring to the ability to modulate
and balance internal needs and wishes with external reality. Sometimes
the term is simply used to refer to the ability to withstand threats
form the external world and to modify the external world. Embodiment
helps them to realize that they are larger than their most powerful
emotions.

**Ego Wrapping --** According to Al Pesso, every expression of the self,
the shape, should be met with the touch and action countershape of those
figures who assist us in making ego. That is, every part of our self
should be met, touched, named, given dimension and accepted by the
important ego making figures in our life. The skin of the ego, in this
sense, wraps around the soul. Wrapping is meant in the sense of wrapping
a package or a gift, or wrapping a blanket around a baby. Wrapping is
the countershape around the shape. Using this metaphor, the totality of
soul should be wrapped in ego.

**Embodiment** --**** The body in the conception of the **embodied
self** in phenomenology, especially in the work of Husserl and
Merleau-Ponty is seen as the **centre of identity, inseparable from
sensory experience, perception and consciousness**. In the mindfulness
approach embodiment is viewed as the gentle awareness of emotional and
sensate experiences. The client is invited to stay with bodily
sensations and feelings with compassionate awareness. S/he is encouraged
to "move toward" any emotion that may be emerging. By noticing what is
happening in the body, even if tempestuous emotions are surging, the
client can begin to see these as passing biological reactions.





In the practice of more expressive therapies such as Core Energetics,
embodiment also includes the active elicitation of movement, sound and
breath consistent with what is needing to emerge in the client's
immediate experience. It is in this **willingness to participate in the
movement of energy** that greater consciousness arises. One comes to see
oneself and others more clearly for example after allowing the movement
of boisterous and rambunctious energies. Embodiment helps one to realize
that one is larger than ones most powerful emotions.

 





**Emotion --** (n**)** : derived from **Latin emovere** which means "to
move out" or "to move through". According to Wilhelm Reich, *Basically,
emotion is an expressive plasmatic motion*. Pleasurable stimuli cause an
"emotion" of the protoplasm from the center towards the periphery.
Conversely, unpleasurable stimuli cause an "emotion" --- or rather,
**"remotion"** --- from the periphery to the center of the organism.
These two basic directions of biophysical plasma current correspond to
the two basic affects of the psychic apparatus, pleasure and anxiety.
(Wilhelm Reich, Selected Writings (New York: The Noonday Press/ Farrar,
Straus and Giroux, 1961), p. 146). Emotions otherwise are thought to be
the key to coordinating all the parts of us into a harmonious and
healthy whole. Emotions are also a primary signaling system that
communicates intentions and regulates interaction. Emotion thus
regulates self and other and gives life much of its meaning.

**Emotional Motor System --** The emotional motor system, together with
the somatic motor system, make up the brain's 'motor system', which is
responsible for the neural control of all movements. The emotional motor
system, in contrast to the somatic motor system, **originates in the
emotional, or limbic, parts of the brain**. It controls basic behaviors
important for the survival of either the individual or the species. Not
all behavioral patterns are voluntary. Crying, laughing and fear
reactions for example are not mediated by the voluntary motor system,
but by other structures in the CNS, which have been defined as the
**"emotional motor system"**. No motor system, neither somatic nor
emotional, can function without input from the environment. Many, if not
all, of our actions are in fact re-actions. Changes in the environment
direct our actions in every day live.

**Empathy --** A mode of knowing or perceiving the emotional or
psychological state of another, in which the quality of experience of
one person is momentarily shared by another. Kohut describes empathic
ambience as the positive attunement and empathic failures as the
misattunement of two people.

**Empiricism --** The view that sensations or impressions constitute the
most basic form of experience (contrasted with Intellectualism).
Facticity The concrete givenness of situations, in contrast to what we
can voluntarily control or grasp in thought.

**Energetic Cycle --** a map of the Natural Flow of Energy and its
blockages in 9 steps, developed by Jack Painter, PhD. A range of
specialized bodymind techniques including touch, breath-work, gestalt,
emotional release, etc. are used to regulate the energy flow, and help
the person become more conscious about the undefended self and life
affirming expressions of self.

**Energetic Integration --** Energetic Integration® is an innovative
development of Reichian work, developed by Jack Painter, Ph.D., rooted
in Wilhelm Reich's pioneering work as well as in modern therapeutic
methods such as Gestalt process work, Trauma Theories, Psychosomatics
and Energywork. It uses a wide range of mind and body- oriented
approaches including body-sensing, breath work and cycles of charge and
discharge, expressive movement, gestalt enactment, bodymind typologies
and character analytic processes. Energetic Integration® aims at
re-establishing the free flow of energy. Working with the breath and how
it reveals the character defenses enables the person to become conscious
of their energy flow and its blockages, interruptions and leakages.
These tend to be directly linked to old anger, pain and sadness held in
out-dated reaction patterns and hidden memories put out of conscious
awareness long ago. When these early experiences are integrated, the
client can develop healthier and more appropriate ways of being and
doing. An important aspect of Energetic Integration® is working with the
breathwork cycle known as the **Energetic Cycle.** See *Energetic Cycle*

**Energy --** A concept which may be understood in a variety of ways.
Energy is commonly defined as the equivalent of our capacity for doing
work, the product of cellular metabolism. In bodymind integration the
focus is upon the concept as it is involved in all human functioning.
Three assumptions are made concerning the role of energy in human
functioning. (1) that energy is involved, in some way, in all the
processes of life. That includes all movement, feeling, and thought.
These functions would cease if the supply of energy needed to maintain
those basic functions were to stop. (2) Human energy is produced from
the complex combustion of food, and involving the exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide. (3) The living organism can only function if there is a
balance between energy charge and discharge in his body. (4) Living
energy, in its qualitative aspect, its capacity of direction has
consciousness or actually is consciousness.

**Energy Center --** All human beings have within their psychic and
physical organism certain energy centers. These energy centers are
located at various areas in your body. They are not actually in your
physical body, but in the so-called **subtle body**, which affects the
physical glands. Although the functioning of the glandular system is
directly dependent on these centers, the centers themselves are not
physical organs that can be discovered by X-rays or other physical
investigation. Their reality is **psychic**; their physical reality can
be determined only by their effects. **Each energy center relates to a
mental attitude**. As the mental attitude changes from ignorance, fear,
alienation, distrust, and hostility, to an open, trustful, truthful, and
loving state, the energy centers open up. The opening is a distinct
experience in the body, because the unity between body, mind, and spirit
is at that point very intimate. In fear these centers are necessarily
cramped and closed, and the life force cannot penetrate them. When,
however, you inwardly open up for pleasure, joy, happiness on all levels
of your being, the open, relaxed attitude of "letting be" eventually
opens these centers. The opening of the centers creates a full capacity
for living and feeling. Their closed state is responsible for
unhappiness, negativity and lack of feelings. How closed the centers are
determines exactly the degree of living in unreality and therefore in a
state of strife and numbness. Joyful, fruitful, meaningful living
implies a commensurate degree of openness of the centers. The solar
plexus center for example opens the way to the connection and
unification with spiritual wisdom, universal truths --- and also the
impersonal love feelings connected with this experience. Opening up this
center must bring you to the seat of all your feelings, which usually
precedes contact with the divine, at least to a considerable degree. 

**Energy Economy --** The concept of Energy Economy is most simply put
as the idea that what energy is built up must eventually be released.
Each individual is a self-regulating and self-perpetuating energetic
organism and how much energy a given individual can build up, hold,
express, let flow and discharge is determined by a combination of one‟s
own physical make up and one‟s own history. "How much energy an
individual has and how he uses it must determine and be reflected in his
personality. Some people have more energy than others; some are more
contained. An impulsive person, for example, cannot contain any increase
in his level of excitement or energy; he must discharge the increased
excitation as rapidly as possible. A compulsive person uses his energy
differently; he, too must discharge his excitement, but he does so in
rigidly structured patterns of movement and behavior." (Alexander Lowen,
MD, Bioenergetics, p. 47)

**Energy Flow --** Energy flows in the body e.g. from head to toe and
from feet to head and in forms of spirals (forms of 8 of infinity).

**Enstasy.** Term coined by Mircea Eliade (1969) to describe
**meditative absorption** (*sam*ä*dhi*) and used in Bodymind Integraton
to describe absorption generally. *Enstasy,* meaning "to stand in," well
describes states of subjectless envelopment or immersion, such as trance
states and meditative absorption, and should be contrasted with
*ecstasy,* meaning "to put outside," which describes states of
subjectless euphoric infusion, such as rapture and transport. See
*absorption, infusion. *

**Epistemology --** The theory of knowledge.

**Eros --** The erotic force is one of the most potent forces in
existence and has tremendous momentum and impact. It is supposed to
serve as the bridge between sex and love, yet it rarely does. In a
spiritually highly developed person, the erotic force carries the entity
from the erotic experience, which in itself is of short duration, into
the permanent state of pure love. However, even the strong momentum of
the erotic force carries the soul just so far and no farther. It is
bound to dissolve if the personality does not learn to love, by
cultivating all the qualities and requirements necessary for true love.
Only when love has been learned does the spark of the erotic force
remain alive. By itself, without love, the erotic force burns itself
out. This of course is the trouble with marriage. Since most people are
incapable of pure love, they are also incapable of attaining ideal
marriage.

**Essential Self** -- In the Pathwork, **another word for** **Real Self,
your true being, devine self, genuine self or True Self**. It is
contrasted with the Superficial Self. See *Real Self*

**Existence --** Heidegger's name for dasein's way of being, namely, as
the kind of being that embodies an understanding and that manifests in
its actions (ways of perceiving, thinking, doing) an implicit
interpretation of what it is to be the kind of being it is. This
understanding is not fundamentally conceptual or even conscious but is
shown in the acts and practices that an individual undertakes. Thus,
embodying an understanding of oneself is to act and be ready to act
(comport oneself) in certain characteristic ways. It is a
self-understanding and a reaching forward into the world and into the
future.

**Existential approach (or analysis) --** A form of therapy that posits
that a person's decisions, commitment, and responsibility for "choosing
the future" give meaning to life, whereas choosing the past leads to
boredom, meaninglessness, and despair.

**Expression --** In humans, the spontaneous and purposeful physical and
vocal behavior which communicates feeling and meaning. This includes our
natural and learned capacity for facial expression, gesturing and use of
limbs and posture, the voice: all non-verbal com­munication which is both
conscious and controlled as well as non-conscious and spontaneous.

**Expressive language --** A term from Wilhelm Reich, which he
contrasted with what he called **"word language."**  Reich works
with the language of facial and body expression. Reich states that "The
patient's expressive movements involuntarily bring about an imitation in
our own organism. By imitating these movements, we "sense" and
understand the expression in ourselves and, consequently, in the
patient. Since every movement is expressive of a biological condition,
i.e., reveals an emotional condition of the protoplasm, the language of
facial and body expression becomes an essential means of communicating
with the patient's emotions."(Reich, Character Analysis, 1933/1949/1972,
p. 362) See *somatic transference, character attitude.*

**Expressive system --** A concept naming the interaction of
psychological and physical processes which produces any external
behavior reflecting an internal state.

**Evil --** The act of doing harm for the express purpose of doing harm.





**Falling anxiety** -- is both a biological and a psychological
phenomenon. Falling anxiety is the fear of falling and the fear of
failure and losing face. It comes from imbalance (of alignment), weak
grounding, and vegetative contraction. Because of falling anxiety,
people develop hang-ups. See *hang-ups, grounding, vegetative
contraction*

**False Self --** Originally psychological concepts introduced
into psychoanalysis in 1960 by Donald Winnicott. The *False Self ((also
known as **fake self**, **idealized self**, **superficial
self** and **pseudo self** and in Core Energetics as the* ***mask
self*)**, an artificial persona that people create very early in life to
protect themselves from re-experiencing developmental trauma, shock and
stress in close relationships. This False or "public" Self often appears
polite and well-mannered, and puts on a "show of being real."
Internally, people who live out of their False Self feel empty, dead or
"phony," unable to be spontaneous and alive, and to show their True Self
in any part of their lives. The false self, Winnicott saw as a defensive
façade, which, in extreme cases, could leave its holders lacking
spontaneity and feeling dead and empty, behind a mere appearance of
being real. See *Mask Self, True Self*

**Fascia --** This term refers to the body-wide collagenous web or any
section of it.

**Fawn --** Fawn types seek safety by **merging with the wishes, needs
and demands of others**. They act as if they unconsciously believe that
the price of admission to any relationship is the forfeiture of all
their needs, rights, preferences and boundaries.

**Fear --** According to the Pathwork, in order to become what you truly
are, the fundamental prerequisite is fearlessness. The **fear of the
self** is the basic fear behind the **fear of life** and even the **fear
of death.** Neither could the fear of others possibly exist without the
fear of oneself. Overcoming fear of self is the key. Every kind of fear
amounts, in the last analysis, to fear of self; for if there were no
fear of your innermost self, you could not possibly fear anything in
life. In fact, you could not even fear death. To the degree that you
know yourself, you fulfill your life, yourself, your dormant potential.
And to that degree death will not be feared but experienced as an
organic development. The unknown will no longer pose a threat. One of
your most basic fears is the fear of death. The fear of death has its
origin in the confusion of dualistic thinking and perceiving. The fear
itself leads to further confusion. The fear of death can be allayed by
not thinking about it, but nevertheless it lurks in the soul until the
personality has completely fused with divine reality.

**Feedback --** Educational exchange in which the learner is presented
observations about his or her performance but those observations do not
become part of the learner's academic record.

**Feeling** -- Associated with the concept of emotion. Feeling is a
concept characterized by psychological, visceral, and hormonal changes
in the body. Human feeling is the sensory awareness of that sort of
change.

**Felt Sense --** Gendlin's term which refers to the preverbal, bodily
experience of a given concern, to facilitate therapeutic change. Very
methodically, Gendlin encourages clients to identify their felt sense,
explore its nuances as it evolves, and clarify its meaning or
implication for their lives.

**Figure-and-Ground --** A model of consciousness proposed by Gestalt
Psychology that has emerged with scientific investigation and is useful
for studying the Stream of Consciousness. The Gestalt Psychologists,
Wolfgang Koehler and P. Wertheimer, studied visual perception. They
concluded that **the structure of conscious visual perception is based
on a central Figure and a peripheral Ground.** The Figure, the central
part of consciousness, comes from our focus of attention. At the very
same time our experience has a background of "barely conscious elements"
in the periphery; these elements may regard our body position, visceral
sensations, facial expression, non-verbal movements, attitudes, "flash
images," and "barely articulated thoughts." An interesting exercise
developed by the Gestalt psychotherapists is as follows: "Focus on the
'here and now' and describe every thought and sensation that enters into
consciousness."[ ]{.Apple-tab-span}By means of this exercise the person
dicovers that certain perceptions and thoughts are outside of the center
of consciousness, like our back against the chair, the position of an
arm, the amplitude of our breath, and so on, and that by focusing
attention on our inner state, these "barely conscious" elements enter in
the center of consciousness.

**Fixation --** The persistence of modes of gratifying impulses,
reacting defensively to perceived danger, and relating to objects that
belong to earlier stages of psychosexual development. Points of fixation
can be returned to in the process of regression.

**Flesh (chair)** -- Merleau Ponty's term for the identity of perception
and the perceptible.

**Flight into health** -The phenomenon in which the resistant patient
may exhibit a premature and temporary improvement of personal
difficulties as a result of the unconscious wish to evade a further
psychodynamic exploration of these conflicts.

**Flooding** -- Occurs when more energy is built up in the body than the
person can comfortably contain. The organism is overwhelmed and the
person's ego is not able to process all incoming energetic stimuli and
loses contact with reality.. The person's body is either: 1. Too
overloaded with energy (which can cause a collaps, a flight or freeze
reaction) 2. Too contracted, which results in ineffective containment or
3. Too undernourished, awareness or grounded, to properly process the
surge of incoming energy. Signs of flooding include anxiety, feeling
scared, dizziness, nausea, and irregular breathing.

**Flow --** A movement within the organism which is exemplified by the
flow of blood. The organism also can experience a flow of excitation, or
of feeling. ***Energy* flow** is another important type of flow
functioning in the body.

**Fold --** Defense Response -- **A complete or sudden loss of bodily
tone**. A greater degree of nervous system disorganization.

**Foreground --** As distinguished in Gestalt from background, that
aspect of experience that is the focus of attention at any given point.

**Freedom --** Bio-energetically, the absence of inner restraint to the
flow of energy and feeling.

**Free Will** -- Free will, is more than disembodied free-floating will
making arbitrary decisions. [Free will is an embodiment of everything
that we are. ]{.s1}When we consciously own ourselves we make decisions
based on all of who we are. Our freedom lies in owning our decisions.
The knowledge that we are making decisions (acting), and owning those
decisions is what makes us free.

**Freeze --** A defense response. High tension co-contraction of agonist
and antagonist muscles, ie 'scared stiff', can also be an absence of
emotion, fear, lack of concern, numbness, lack of affect.[
]{.Apple-converted-space}A circuit breaker when the system is overloaded
with activation. The system shuts because there is too much draw on it.
If a person is frozen, the process of surrender means
'danger'.[ ]{.Apple-converted-space}Dissociation is an aspect of the
freeze but is a regulated response when one can associate it again at
will. Immobility: innate primitive default reaction when active
fight/flight from predation is not possible. It consists of freezing and
collapsing.

**Function of the Brain --** "*The overall function of the brain is to
be well informed about what goes on in the rest of the body, the body
proper; about what goes on in itself; and about the environment
surrounding the organism, so that suitable survivable accommodations can
be achieved between the organism and the environment."* ([Damasio,
1994,]{.s1} p. 90) The neurosciences have shown that emotions and their
regulation are essential to the adaptive function of the brain, and that
the regulation of affect is a central organizing principle of human
development and motivation. Damasio asserts that emotions are the
highest order direct expression of bioregulation in complex organisms
(1998), and that primordial representations of body states are the
building blocks and scaffolding of development ([1994]{.s1}). Brothers
argues that emotion occurs "in the context of evolved systems for the
mutual regulation of behavior, often involving bodily changes that act
as signals" (1997, p. 123).





**Garden of delight --** The idyllic world of the child in the early
preoedipal stage, before splitting occurs. The garden of delight is a
small, safe, resplendent paradise. It is a world in which the child,
provided for by the archetypal Great Mother, is free of danger and need;
and it is a world that, embellished by the plenipotent power of the
Dynamic Ground, is glorious and wondrous. The preoedipal child in the
garden of delight is the practicing toddler, who fearlessly explores and
greedily enjoys the world. See *Great Mother, life-world. *

**Gestalt --** A German word that has no direct translation in English.
"Configuration," "form," "shape," "structure," and "whole" are used as
translations, but none of these capture the complete meaning. "Figure"
and "Gestalt" are often used interchangeably. See *foreground,
background*

**God --** According to Albert Pesso (who won the USABP lifetime
achievement award of body psychotherapy) God is "everything that is," It
is being itself. See *Pesso, Soul*

**Good Mother --** See *Great Mother. *

**Great Father --** According to Jordan Peterson, the ***Great Father is
"masculine offspring" of "precosmogonic chaos"***; is embodiment of the
known, the predictable, the familiar; is **security and tyranny
simultaneously**. The Great Father is **patriarchal society**,
tradition, pomp and circumstance, military-industrial complex, and
super-ego: demanding, rigid, unjust, dangerous and necessary. He is
ambivalent, in precisely the same manner as the Great Mother, his
"wife." In the guise of literal father, he is protection for children,
who are too immature and vulnerable to deal with the unknown. More
abstractly, he is the pattern of behavior the father represents, that
becomes "internalized" during maturation. The Great Father takes the
infinite possibility of spirit that the infant represents and forges it
into something limited but actual. He is manner incarnate, ruling all
social interactions. ***Great Father as wise King*,** as security. The
wise King maintains stability, not because he is afraid of the unknown,
but because nothing new can be built without a strong foundation. He is
the adaptive routines, developed by the heroes of the past, whose
adoption by those in the present allows for control and safety. He is a
house with doors; a structure that shelters, but does not stifle; a
master who teaches and disciplines but does not indoctrinate or crush.
He represents the tradition fostering cooperation among people whose
shared culture makes trust easy --- among people whose immediate
familiarity banishes the fear normally produced by the "other." The
Great Father as Wise King keeps one foot on the Terrible Mother -- keeps
the monsters of chaos locked up in his dungeon or banished to the nether
regions of the kingdom. He is the personality of dead heroes (that is,
the action patterns and hierarchies of value established through
exploration in the past) organised according to the principle of
"respect for the intrinsic value of the living" --- or, it might be
said. This makes him the King who takes advice from his subjects --- who
is willing to enter into creative interchange with those he "dominates,"
legally --- and to benefit from this "advice from the unworthy." See
*Great Mother*

**Great Mother --** A personified representation (imago) of on the one
hand the experience of being comforted and nurtured, and on the other,
of being terrifyingly vulnerable to the withdrawal of same. The
preoedipal child's primary object representation: the archetypal
caregiver. The Great Mother is the caregiver amplified and otherwise
embellished by plenipotently charged nonegoic potentials of the Dynamic
Ground. Once preodipal splitting occurs, the Great Mother is divided
into two contrary opposites, a good object and a bad object: the **Good
Mother**, who loves the child unconditionally and provides for the child
perfectly, and the **Terrible Mother**, who is cruel, neglectful, and
smothering. See *imago*, *nonegoic potentials, splitting. *

**Grounded** -- is the experience of being in the truth of the present
moment. The person feels in connection with themselves, their whole
body, their feelings and the reality of what is going on around them.
This is also associated with a sensation of feeling in contact with the
support of the "ground", hence the term "being grounded". As Lowen
(1977) explains, when someone is grounded, "he or she is rooted in the
earth, identified with his \[or her\] body, aware of his \[or her\]
sexuality, and oriented toward pleasure. These qualities are lacking in
the person who is 'up in the air' or in his \[or her\] head instead of
in his \[or her\] feet."

**Grounding --** Grounding refers to a person's ability to experience
themselves through their physical presence. The purpose of grounding is
to support "proprioception," the ability to sense your movement, action,
and location. Grounding focusses on your ability to sense the support of
the earth, or the support of the chair beneath you, or the orientation
of things within the space around you -- in service of regulating your
NS. Grounding techniques are key resource for trauma recovery and can
help manage sensations of emotional overwhelm and physical pain. In an
individual, grounding is the ability to be present in reality and to
experience one's full spectrum of feelings and pleasure in the moment.
Literally, the physical and emotional state of having contact with the
feet and the ground. The opposite of being well- grounded is being "up
in the air," and out of touch with either the reality of the physical
body, or the reality of the physical world. At least three forms of
grounding can be considered: **vertical** which is the grounding between
the cosmos and the earth, **horizontal** which is the grounding around
you connected to other people and the third is the grounding **in time
from past to present to future**. Physical grounding exercises: all
exercises which create more or full body awareness.

**Group dynamics --** This refers to the interactional patterns within
groups. This includes group-level experiences such as group cohesion
based on seeing the group as attractive and helpful and that provides an
important supportive function. Group norms evolve from the group
interaction with guidance from the leader that give stability and safety
within the group. Members will also adopt group roles based on their own
outside behaviors that will provide important learning experiences in
the group interaction.





**Hang-up --** Characteristic holding pattern that can be seen as part
of the premature and unnatural bracing against **falling anxiety**. It
becomes chronically structured into the body, involving the shoulder
girdle and neck musculature, that look like a coat rack, giving the
impression of "up in the air"' or "hung-up."One is then disconnected
from the ground. On a psychological level a „Hang-up" means a
preoccupation, fixation, or psychological block; a source of annoying
difficulty or burden. See also *Grounding*, *Falling anxiety*

**Hands-on work --**

**Hard techniques --** are techniques to work with someone‟s energy that
are more assertive and forceful, i.e.: stomping and punching.

**Here and now --** A term that refers to present, ongoing active events
in interpersonal relationships, in contrast to fantasized future or past
presentations.

**Higher Self --** Our divine CORE (our true self, real self, the
essential spiritual level, the *Center of Right Energy*) -- the
repository of endless joy, intuition and creativity. This is the part of
us that knows no fear, that understands and welcomes our life task and
knows that there is no conflict between your Higher Self and my Higher
Self and that dualistic conflict is only a painful illusion. It contains
wisdom, happiness and the answer to all questions about our growth and
development. The **higher self** is the essence of divine truth (the
expression of God within). The Higher Self is TRUTH. It's energy,
pleasure, and creativity and LOVE. Core Energetic work seeks to bring
awareness to the mask, integrate and transform the negative intentions
and energies of the lower self, and help the individual to center and
live from the higher self. Longing, surrender, trust, pleasure,
creativity and vulnerability, all of which are aspects of the higher
self. See *Mask*, *Lower Self, Map of Consciousness.*

**Holding --** refers to the experience of holding in energy or holding
in back from its optimal flow. For psychiatrists Alexander Lowen and
John C. Pierrakos "holding" is representative of a person's emotional
blocking (in other words dysfunctional auto-regulation of emotion).
Holding is the "process" by which that person interrupts their own
energy flow. Building on the character analytic theory of W. Reich they
have identified **five basic holding patterns.** The stage of ego
development is key to the holding pattern: (i) **Holding together** in
response to the fear of falling apart/fragmentation (ii) **Holding on**
in response to the fear of rejection/abandonment (iii) **Holding up** in
response to the fear of failure/dominance (iv) **Holding in**, in
response to the fear of letting go/exploding (v) **Holding Back** in
response to the fear of being overwhelmed.

**Holes-in-Roles** -- A concept by Albert Pesso. It is close to the
parentification concept of systems theory. 'Holes' are gaps in the
fabric or network of family roles and relationships. Whenever there is a
gap in something that is supposed to be organically whole, the
perception of the hole produces a sense of incompletion in the viewer
(see) and an impulse to make it complete and unified again (do).
Holes-in-Roles develop when a child's compassion and imperative for
justice is awakened too early without redirection. For example, when a
child learns that his or her parent was physically abused as a child, a
natural response is to feel compassion and attempt to comfort and heal.
However, this is an impossible task for the child; indeed, a young child
cannot right the wrong that the parent experienced as a child, and yet
the child, without redirection, will continue to psychically attempt to
take on this responsibility for their parent's needs. The child's energy
is focused away from his/her own appropriate self-development to now
taking on the burden of parenting the parent and a longing for justice
for the injustice that has occurred. This focus results in an inability
to receive caretaking. As an adult, the outcome is over-caretaking where
one places themselves in an omnipotent position of feeling that only
they can rescue or save others. This leads to feelings of inadequacy
and, ultimately, exhaustion. 

**Humanistic theory --** Comprises two overarching concerns: What it
means to be fully, experientially human, and how that perspective
illuminates the vital or fulfilled life.

**Humanistic therapy --** Conditions or stances that assist people to
grapple with and become more of who they aspire to become.





**Id --** Freud's term (borrowed from Groddeck's das 'Es') for the deep,
inherited unconscious, the seat of instinctual drives (Libido and
Aggression) and the prerational primary process. Freud's view seems to
have been that the id is originally and inherently unconscious, although
he is not completely clear on this point. See *Dynamic Ground, latency,
primal repression, unconscious. *

**Ideal Figure --** Figures role played by group members in symbolic
family constellatios, that would be so constructed as to match the needs
of a client in a therapeutic work so that those needs can be
symbolically experienced and satisfied.

- **Ideal Father** -- The wished for, missing father with attributes
  that were longed for in ones' childhood, role played by a group
  member.

<!-- -->

- **Ideal Mother** -- The wished for, missing mother with attributes
  that were longed for in one's childhood, role played by a group
  member.

**Idealized Self-Image** -- This is the part of us that thinks we should
be perfect. It hides a lot of who we are while showing others how we
would like them to see us. The ISI is our attempt to project a perfect
(necessarily false) image to the world, and even to ourselves. The
creation of the idealized self-image serves the purpose of obtaining the
missing self-confidence.

**Images --** In Core Energetics and the Pathwork: **impressions or
attitudes** usually formed as **conclusions in the mind** of the person,
most which are wrong because they are not thought through, rather
emotional reactions. Such impressions happen due to environmental
influences or to sudden, unexpected experiences, and after the formation
of conclusions, generate **generalizations**. These generalizations
later establish themselves as **preconceived ideas.** We call each such
conclusion an "**image**". The wrong conclusions that form an image are
drawn from ignorance and half-knowledge and thus they cannot remain in
the conscious mind. Embodied Consciousness work like Core Energetics
aims at transforming such images.

**Imagery --** The arousal of mental images through sensory neural
stimuli.

**Imago --** A personified representation

**Immanent --** Meaning "**within**," this term is used to designate the
ego's inner world of experience as opposed to the outer world of
transcendent, independent objects. The boundary marking off the
immanence of the self from the transcendence of the world changes during
early childhood. No such boundary exists for the newborn, whose
experience, therefore, is all-inclusive, wholly immanent. The surface of
the skin is the boundary separating immanence from transcendence for the
preoedipal body ego, and the dividing line between private psychic space
and public physical space is the boundary separating immanence from
transcendence for the mental ego. See *body ego, mental ego, object
permanence, ouroboros, transcendent. *

**Implicit memory --** Memory of aspects of experience inherent in, but
not obviously part of, the content of events. Usually nonverbal and
unconscious.

**Individuation process --** The process of achieving "wholeness,"
wherein all competing aspects of the personality are accepted,
integrated and harmonized. Marked by the appearance of the Self, and by
subjective states of a religious or spiritual character.

**Infantile sexuality --** The term "infantile sexuality" refers to all
sexual manifestations from birth to about six years of age. The erotic
pleasure a baby derives from nursing or thumbsucking is considered to be
sexual in nature. Between the ages of three and five, childhood
sexuality becomes focused on the genitals. In the fifth year, according
to Freud, at the height of development of childhood sexuality, that
focus comes close to that reached in maturity. The difference between
childhood and adult sexuality is that the former lacks the elements of
penetration and ejaculation, the reproductive aspects of sexuality.
Childhood sexuality is, therefore, a surface phenomenon.

**Insight --** When you have an *insight*, you have a feeling or emotion
or thought that helps you to know something essential about a person or
thing. *Insight*[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[isn't based on hard facts
or evidence. And it doesn't have anything to do with using your senses
such as sight or smell. When you
gain]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*insight*[,
you are using
your]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*intuition*[,
or]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*sixth
sense*[.]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*Insight*[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[is
formed from the
prefix]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*in-*[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[plus
the English
word]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[ ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}*sight*[, so
this word literally means seeing inward.]{style="font-size: 18px;"}

**Inner Self --** See Self

**Instinctual drives --** Innate motivational forces originating within
the organism that seek discharge or gratification. In Freud's theory,
drives are characterized by their source, aim and object. The two basic
instincts are the sexual (libido) and the aggressive. Lowen (1975)
translates these longing and aggression. Longing is associated with
eros, love and tenderness. It is characterized by the movement of
excitation along the front of the body which is perceived as having a
tender, erotic quality. See *discharge, eros, love, aggression*

**Integration --** the linkage of differentiated components of a system.
Integration is the core mechanism in the cultivation of more well-being.
The integration of body-experiences establishes the physical self. The
increasing integration of the brain functions enable more intricate
functions to emerge (e.g. a mind of one's own, insight, empathy,
intuition, and morality). Increasing integration of body, integration of
separate aspects of mental processes (mind), integration of polarities
(left brain --- right brain, inputs --- outputs, male --- female, power
--- receptivity) enables social exchanges, the identifications of social
boundaries, and the identifications of social causality as central
self-functions. Gradually 

**Interpersonal therapy --** A form of treatment that focuses on current
life events---especially grief, developmental transitions, role
disputes, and social deficits---based on the fundamental thesis that
disorders are the result of unsatisfactory relationships and social
maladaptation, the consequence of the individual's attempts to adapt to
surroundings.

**Interpretation --** Verbalized understanding of meaning, conscious or
unconscious, of patient behavior or experience.

**Interrelational --**

**Intimacy --** We all struggle in our lives with how to make contact
with others, how to develop a connection, how to touch or be touched by
someone. In Core Energetics, contact is viewed on a spectrum that
contains degrees of intimacy. . . . Intimacy here is divided into two
parts that are opposite sides of the same coin. **The first part is the
willingness to reveal yourself to another**, to let someone see as much
of who you really are as possible. The more you are willing to open
yourself to another, the more intimacy you will have in your
relationship, the closer you will feel. **The other half of intimacy is
the willingness to take the other in**, to have the intention to see
someone for who he or she truly is. **Genuine intimacy necessitates
seeing people not as you want them to be, but how they really are.** In
a relationship, if you can open yourself to your partners, friends, or
relatives and also accept them for who they are, you are on the way to
experiencing bliss. (Black, 2004, pp. 29-30) See *bliss*

**Introjection --** Form of internalization by which properties or
functions of another person in a relationship are assimilated to the
self-structure but remain partially integrated, instinctually motivated,
and defensively organized. Introjective structure is reflected in
self-representations. See
*internatlization*, *introjection*, *self-representations*

**Introspection --** A person's ability to use self-reflection to know
his or her own internal states, including emotions, thoughts, fantasies,
and values.





**Jung, Carl Gustav --** (1857-1961)** **A Swiss psychiatrist and
psychoanalyst who founded analytical psychology. Jung's work was
influential in the fields of psychiatry, anthropology, archaeology,
literature, philosophy, and religious studies. See *archetypes,* *self*





**Katharsis --**

**Knowledge --** facts, information, and skills acquired through
experience or education; the theoretical or practical understanding of a
subject. Awareness or familiarity gained by experience of a fact or
situation. Knowledge is not only cumulative, it grows exponentially.
Those with a rich base of factual knowledge find it easier to learn
more. See *wisdom, higher self*





**Leadership --** Refers to the capacity to help people develop and
helping others reach their full potential. A leader has to want to give
unselfishly. Unselfish giving must exist truly in the smallest
acts. Leadership in its real sense is built on the love of true giving
and on the true giving of love. No one can exist without leadership. See
*potential*

**Leaks --** Places on the body where one "leaks" out energy, reducing
the ability to build up enough energy for optimal flow and grounding.
Leaks are often found in places on the body where one can see a
depression, indentation or hollow area.

**Libido --** For Michael Washburn,** ***libido* designates the power of
the Ground insofar as it is channeled through an instinctual system or
restricted to an instinctual organization. Conceived thus, libido is
**instinctual energy** generally rather than, as Freud held, sexual
energy exclusively. In the Reichian understanding, following Freud's
original theory, libido is the human sexual energy, which above a
certain level is felt as sexual excitation. See *id, plenipotent, power
of the Ground, psychic energy, sexual energy, Spirit. Reich*

**Life Force --** The life force is the creative force that enlivens the
whole universe. It contains all life elements, all potentials, every
possibility for life expression.

**Life Task**  -- Life Task is one of the fundamental concepts tying the
description of an individual incarnation and the path that a personality
will tread during his/her days of living. Task has to do as much with
performance and service as it does with overcoming and obstacle or
learning a specific theme.  **Alfred ****Adler** believed that for all
people there are **three basic life tasks: work, friendship, and love**
or intimacy. The work task is realized when work is meaningful and
satisfying. The friendship task is achieved through satisfying
relationships with others. The love or intimacy task is addressed by
learning to love oneself as well as another. Others have added a fourth
task:---the task of **getting along with oneself**. According to **the
Pathwork**, the task of every fragmented, apparently disconnected aspect
of consciousness is to realize its true identity and connection with the
real self. This happens through an often laborious groping search,
through attempts of the mind to expand its own narrow limitations. See
*Path, Pathwork, Adler, Eva Pierrakos*

**Love --** Words will never grasp this word. A good way to speak it is
that it is the binding power between two people that does not lead to
attachment but to joy and bliss. Ken Dychtwald, in Bodymind says: "...
love is simply, yet profoundly the unrestricted experience of life. Its
existence is continuous, but we experience it only to the degree that we
have allowed our bodyminds to be open, integrated, and balanced. Within
this perspective, love is not a place to go, but rather it is **a place
that is here all the time**, waiting to be continually rediscovered by
each of us." In Eros, Love & Sexuality, John Pierrakos states: "Love is
not a given, it's **a state that we work toward and experience
gradually**. It is difficult to achieve because when blocks in the body
and in the personality are released through love, the freed energy will
intensify existing blocks or create new ones to slow down the expansion
-- as we water the flowers, so do we water the weeds. Thus we are in
continual duality wherein the positive (creative) aspect of life meets
the negative (destructive) aspect. The task of our personal evolution is
to **move toward unification of the duality.** (p.66) According to
Pierrakos, **love is the continual movement of the body and mind working
together to open and expand, contract and defend.** Bringing conscious
awareness to the process of love through all relationships helps the
body and mind work synergistically to release what the ego wants to hold
onto. Pierrakos : "Love is **an energy located in the heart center**.
When this center is open and active, it sends out a strong current of
energy that **integrates with other energy centers of the body such as
the solar plexus** (third chakra), **or the throat** (fifth chakra). It
**creates a powerful surge of energy that travels from head to foot and
also outward in waves to the loved one.**"(p.70). **The "higher octave"
of love engaged both the heart and the pelvis** when the passion that
streamed forth was spontaneous and unimpeded. Reich came to understand
that people who are connected to their energy --- including sexuality
and passion --- are **in tune with the divine**, for expressing the
inherently loving side of human nature is the core of **unfeigned
spirituality.** See *sexuality, eros*

**Loving Limits --** Through Loving Limits children learn that there are
boundaries and limits in life. The parent physically restrains or
constrains the infant or older child from doing damage to him/herself or
others. The adolescent requires help to contain and navigate their
nuclear energies, which are the capacity to create (sexuality) and the
capacity to destroy (aggression and anger). It is important to note that
Basic Needs are met in a developmental sequence, similarly to Maslow's
hierarchy of needs. That is, first there must be satisfaction on a
Literal basis and secondarily on a Symbolic level. As these needs become
fulfilled by parents or significant caregivers, they become internalized
so that the individual can meet his or her own needs in adulthood.
Symbolic interactions are imperative as they have an impact on ego
development and the child's increasing necessity of knowing how to
navigate in the broader world. See *Pesso, basic needs*

**Lower Self --** In the understanding of The Pathwork and Core
Energetics, the Lower Self is **the creative center of our negative
attitudes and feelings toward self and others**. The lower self consist
not only of the common faults and the individual weaknesses that vary
with each person, but also of ignorance and laziness. **Pride, self-will
and fear** are the crux of the Lower Self. Each of these attitudes is a
different form of denial and therefore according to the Pathwork Guide
(channeled by Eva Pierrakos) even more dangerous to the soul than more
overt forms of evil. It is a powerful **energetic pattern** that
**invites and escalates negative attitudes**, hostility, abuse of power,
arrogance and all manner of separateness and cruelty. **The Lower Self,
detached from conscious awareness,** **is an interior prison**. Core
Energetics based on the Pathwork and on Bioenergetics aims at
transforming negativity in order to contact the essential spiritual
level of the "higher self." See *Higher Self,* *Mask Self*





**Mask Self --** The Mask Self is **the face we show to the world.**
John Pierrakos has also called it the Little Ego Self. The Mask Self is
the **protective layer or social personaIity** that has been created by
each of us to protect us from pain and rejection. It defends us against
vulnerability. It is always **"other" oriented**: to please another, to
control another's reaction to us, to manipulate another. It is all based
on learned behavior in a way. When we are in the Mask Self, we blame
others for our misery rather than accepting responsibility for it. The
Mask is false and separates us from our real, spontaneous selves -- both
positive and negative. The Mask encloses our Lower Self (negative)
feelings with a mask that we hoped would insure our lovability. Core
Energetic work seeks to bring awareness to the Mask, integrate and
transform the negative intentions and energies of the Lower Self, and
help the individual to center and live from the Higher Self or
Core. *See Persona, False Self, Lower Self, Higher Self*, *Spontaneous
expression*

- **Mask of Serenity --** Susan *Thesenga* in the Undefended Self
  (p. 138) writes: "The *mask of serenity* is an attempt to escape the
  difficulties and vulnerabilities of human life by always appearing
  completely serene and detached. In fact, what the person really
  pursues is the distortion of serenity, which is withdrawal,
  indifference, evasion of life, non-commitment, cynical worldly
  detachment, or false spiritual detachment."
- **Mask of Love** -- *Susan Thesenga* in The Undefended Self (p. 135)
  writes: "The mask of love is an attempt to extract love from others by
  always appearing to be loving. The personality becomes submissive,
  dependent, appeasing, and self-denying in the hope of guaranteeing,
  controlling, and buying love and approval from others. The false
  belief of such a mask self is that it must be loved at all costs, and
  therefore the personality is deliberately made weaker, more helpless,
  or subservient, than it really is. Security and self-esteem are then
  imagined to rest on securing and possessing the love and approval of
  others."
- **Mask of Power --** *Susan Thesenga* in the Undefended Self (p. 137)
  writes: The mask of Power is an attempt to get control of life and
  others by always appearing completely independent, aggressive,
  competent, domineering Falsely reducing life to a struggle for
  domination, the power mask is attempting to escape from the
  vulnerability experienced as a child. Security and self-esteem rest on
  winning in all situations and becoming free of human needs and
  weaknesses. The power drive is idealized, and love and contact are
  rejected."
- **A Combination Mask --** "Sometimes the masks of love, power and
  serity are mixed in the same person, which causes tremendous inner
  confusion since they pursue contradictory goals and idealizations.
  Whereas the love mask pretends to be all-loving, and to deny strength
  and independence, the power mask denies the need for love, pretending
  to be all powerful. Preferring to be "above it all," the serenity mask
  engages in neither the struggle to love nor the battle to dominate,
  regarding both with contempt. While the love and power masks go in
  different directions, they are equally false, rigid, unrealistic, and
  unrealizable. Nor is the combination of these maske any closer to
  reality." (*Thesenga*, p. 139-140).

**Maturity --** Emotional maturity is, foremost, the capacity to
love. Emotional maturity also means being unafraid to pay the price of
living. (PGL 49). Emotional maturity means being unafraid of your own
emotions (positive and negative ones). In emotional maturity you will no
longer fear your positive feelings, either, because you will accept an
occasional hurt. You will risk expressing your positive feelings rather
than withholding them from others, because enveloping the other with
warmth, comfort, and tenderness is more important than what might happen
to you later. Emotional maturity or **emotional health** means knowing
what you want, wanting what you can have, and being willing to pay the
price for it. To give up egotism on all levels of your being, to reach
into the depths of your unconscious reactions---which may be so contrary
to your outward ones---and come to know them fully is to attain true
emotional maturity. (PGL 49) *"*Maturity is to a great extent the
ability to put cause and effect together. ... also indicates the degree
of awareness an entity has reached through his development." (PGL 196). 

**Mental structure --** The relatively stable and lasting organizations
of mental contents and functions.

**Metaphysics --** The study of the nature of reality and of the
relations among things that are real.

**Meta-view --** Meta (from the Greek μετά-, *meta-*, meaning "after" or
"beyond") is a prefix meaning more comprehensive or
transcending. The meta-view focus brings clarity to what may seem
chaotic or confusing from the ground, or at the level of experience we
call "life."

**Mirror neurons --** In 1996, Gallese, Fadiga, Fogassi, Rizzolati
highlighted the existence of "mirror neurons" in the brain, are in
charge of the empathy. The therapist's occipital area, the part that
processes images, sends the information that has been perceived to the
fronto-temporal cortex, another part that prepares for action, thus
alerting mirror neurons. The therapist, simply by perceiving and feeling
without acting, can assess the emotional and subjective state of his
patient. Rizzolati, Fogassi, Gallese (2007) have shown that mirror
neurons are missing among autistic patients. This has initiated a new
therapeutic approach based on mutual imitation between the autistic
patient and the psychotherapist, imitation underlying the development of
the capacity for empathy. There are today many more applications of the
understanding of this anatomical insight.

**Mitsein ("being-with") --** A term intended to convey that dasein is
always in a shared, public world. The elements of that world with which
it is familiar, which it understands and which matter to it, are shared
with (and, Heidegger would say, created by) other people. Since these
elements are constitutive of dasein, dasein is necessarily always
relating to other people through a shared world. See *Dasein*

**Monism --** The view that reality is one thing.

**Motility --** A name for the body's natural rhythms and pulsations The
internal, involuntary movements of the body upon which the conscious,
voluntary movements are based. Motility is reduced when blocks or
chronic muscular tension interrupt the flow of energy. This, in turn,
reduces the larger, external, expressive movements. See *Blocks, Flow of
Energy*

**Movement --** Related to motility, but the word is used to mean larger
movements of the body; all types of body parts displacement of space for
expression. Move­ment includes motility. See *motility.*

**Muscular armor --** The experience-dependent development of a
protective shell of muscle tension grown over time in response to a
history of threat, anxiety and trauma. *See armor*

**Musculoskeletal pain --** Pain involving structures of the
musculoskeletal system that includes muscles, bones, joints, ligaments,
and tendons.

**Myofascial meridian --** A connected string of myofascial or fascial
structures.





**Narcissism.** Used primarily in two ways---first, **a way of
conceiving of human development**, characterized by the growth and
stability of the self independent of its transactions with externally
experienced others; second, **a line of development** (vs. a fixed stage
or pathological state) characterized by the strivings to form and
maintain a vital self. Heinz Kohut distinguished between healthy
narcissism, a strong and vital self with ambition and ideals striving
toward the realization of individual talents and skills, and
pathological narcissism wherein self strivings are unsuccessful in
maintaining a cohesive and stable self-representation. See *self
representation*

**Narcissistic injury.** Experiences of having one's self-esteem lowered
that are accompanied by painful affects of sadness, embarrassment, or
humiliation.

**Negative intentionality** -- That part of the self which is **locked
into negation**. It is not the same as negativity. Negativity comprises
a wide range of feelings such as envy, hate, fear, or pride. Negative
intentionality is **deliberate choice to hold on to a state of negating
life** and the self. It is also a means of punishing life. Courage and
humility are required to recognize that there is such a spot of ill will
inside us. There is a twisted, immature reasoning behind this attitude
and behind the resistance to give it up. If these are recognized, the
road is open to the transition to positive intentionality, and thus to
liberation. See *lower self, maturity*

**New or Synthetic Memory --** [  ]{.Apple-converted-space}Albert Pesso
in his therapy "structures" recreates the traumatic event and
restructures past emotional reactions and expressions. He has the client
enroll an idealized protective parent that the client instructs to react
in the way the client would have desired in the actual event. This
intervention creates a memory of an externalized protector figure
outside the client so the client can **internalize the resources** of
this new symbolic representation. Pesso would say these are not
internalized people, but actual historical players **experienced in the
client's mind**. What is internal is the lack of what could be and the
memory needs to be replayed in a way that the wounding does not happen.
The **antidote** is an internalization of a simulated experience of
growing up in a loving, caring environment where such wounding things
could never happen. Experience of the rightness of the new memory helps
build the self. See *antidote*

**Noema --** Husserl's term for the intentional content of
consciousness, as distinct from its object.

**Noesis --** Husserl's term for a concrete mental state, as distinct
from its intentional content.

**Nonegoic potentials --** Sources of experience situated in the deep
core of the psyche, the Dynamic Ground: energy (the power of the
Ground), instincts, sources of affective response, and the creative
imagination (autosymbolic process). Nonegoic potentials, situated in the
deep psyche, are to be distinguished from ego functions, which are
exercised by the ego, the organizing agency of consciousness. The
following nonegoic potentials are active at birth or soon thereafter:

1.  [*the power of the Ground,* which affects the newborn either as an
    inwardly pooled oceanic reservoir (in which the newborn gestates
    during sleep) or as an outwardly flowing, object-directed stream
    (which amplifies intentional states when the newborn is awake and
    engaged); ]{.s1}
2.  [*biological instincts,* which generate impulses in response to
    target stimuli, prompting corresponding object-related
    behaviors; ]{.s1}
3.  [*emotive potentials,* which give rise to powerful body-based
    feelings; and ]{.s1}
4.  [*the autosymbolic imagination,* which projects preencoded images
    upon genetically selected stimuli as they appear within the field of
    perception. At the outset of life we are radically open and,
    consequently, receptive not only to a wide range of external stimuli
    but also to a wide range of energies, impulses, feelings, and images
    arising from the Dynamic Ground within. ]{.s1}

Not all nonegoic potentials are active at birth, for some (e.g.,
sexuality as it emerges during puberty) are governed by a biological
timetable and become active only at later stages of development. See
*autosymbolic process, Dynamic Ground, ego, ego functions, id, psyche. *

**Numinous.** Rudolf Otto's (1917) term to designate the experience of
the sacred or holy. Otto described the numinous as the *mysterium
tremendum et fascinans,* a compelling and mysterious energy of
prodigious magnitude. See *plenipotent, power of the Ground, regression
in the service of transcendence, Spirit. *

**Nurturance --** The act of caring for infants' needs that literally
sustain life and keep them alive -- such as nursing, feeding, grooming,
washing and caressing. When nurturance needs are met, an individual can
feel full and satiated inside his or her body, rather than feeling a
sense of hollowness and emptiness inside. In later childhood, this
translates or transposes into symbolic feeding and grooming in a way
that psychologically sustains life such as valuing, appreciating,
affirming and admiring

**Nurturing Breath --** The breathing technique used in the second phase
of the Energetic Cycle, developed by Jack W. Painter. It is about an
inhaling charge into neglected parts and dimensions of our bodies. A
wide variety of nurturing breaths exist:  the *initiating, elongating,
broadening, spiralling*, and *skimming* breaths. These are explored in
one on one therapy sessions and groups. See *Energetic Cycle, Jack
Painter, charge*





**Object permanence**

**Object relations --** Refers to relationships to other people. In
psychoanalysis, it is the internal representations of self and others
that are important in motivating and mediating interpersonal
interactions. A developmental distinction is often made between dyadic
and triadic object relations. The former refer to relationships modeled
on preoedipal experiences where the major goals of the child revolve
around need satisfaction by the mother. Triadic relations are seen as
more mature, implying oedipal engagement and the increasing mental
complexity implicit in being aware of needs and wishes toward one parent
vis-á-vis the other parent. 

**Oedipus complex --** Refers to the developmentally fundamental
constellation of largely unconscious drives, defenses, thoughts,
affects, and object relations relating to the child's wish to possess
exclusively the parent of the opposite sex, which elicits feelings of
rivalry, jealousy, and hostility toward the parent of the same sex and
fears of severe retaliation (e.g., castration, loss of parental love) by
the perceived rival parent. The unresolved Oedipal complex. as defense
as we teach it in Core Energetics is characterized by a **holding back
of feelings,** especially the heart and sexual feelings. This is due to
the child's experiences between the age of three and five. The child
does not distinguish between sexuality and love; to the child it is one
and the same energy. He/she approaches the opposite sex parent with this
vibrant energy, but the parent feels threatened and rejects the child.
The child, confused and hurt, draws the conclusion that his/her love is
bad. He/she makes a conscious decision not to ever become vulnerable and
love again.

**Oedipal issues --** The derivatives of compromise formations (e.g.,
maladaptive coping strategies) and patterns of object relations (e.g.,
triangular interpersonal relationships) stemming from an unresolved
Oedipus complex. 

Jealousy and envy are the two big themes of the Oedipal struggle. *"You
are mine"*, *"I will do anything to get you"*, or *"I will withhold my
pelvis/heart"* are lower self statements of the Oedipal conflict. The
child that was used now wants revenge and says: *"I will use you, like
you have used me"*, *"I will never forgive you, I will hold onto this
until I die."* Seductiveness is another mask that makes a false promise
with the lower self intent of *"I have what you want, but I am not going
to give it to you."*

**The Oedipal theory --** addresses what happens when Oedipus blindly
marries his own mother, i.e. becomes the man besides the mother when the
father is not there, and fills a Hole-in-a-Role. See *holes in roles*

**Ontology** The study of being. See *phenomenology*

**Opening up.** A number of bioenergetic techniques are designed
ultimately to free the person from his/her in­hibitions. By constantly
concentrating on "opening up" in these exercises, one reject the urge to
repress the impulses that these exercises stimulate. The techniques aim
toward (1) developing the capacity for greater expressiveness in the
person, and (2) developing the capacity for greater spontaneity in the
person as a whole, but more particularly in his expressive behavior.

**Oral.** The stage of psychosexual development occurring in the first
18 months of life, during which the oral and peri-oral areas provide the
major source of sensual pleasure. Because the infant is extremely
dependent during this stage, optimal development requires considerable
parental attunement to the needs of the infant; if this is provided
satisfactorily, the infant should acquire a sense of trust and a sense
that the world is safe and that the infant's needs will be met. 

**Orgasm**.In [*Lady Chatterley's Lover,* ]{.s1}D.H. Lawrence speaks of
the orgasm in this way: "and then began again the unspeakable motion
that was not really motion, but pure deepening whirlpools of sensation
swirling deeper and deeper through all her tissue and consciousness till
she was one perfect concentric fluid of feeling."' Hemingway in [*For
Whom the Bell Tolls* ]{.s1}describes an orgasm in which the sensation is
that of the earth moving. For Wilhelm Reich Orgasm, orgasm is a
*fundamental biological phenomenon* ... in the form of an involuntary
contraction and expansion of the total plasma system .... Biophysically
speaking, it is impossible to distinguish the total contraction of an
ameba from the orgastic contraction of a multicellular organism ....
\[and\] which, psychologically, we call "gratification"...*\[T\]he
discharge of the surplus energy in the organism by way of fusion with
another organism* makes itself felt at more or less regular intervals
.... They usually become shorter in the spring \[which\] points to a
close connection between the function of the orgasm and an energy
function of a cosmic nature.






. See *plasma system, gratification*

**Orgasm Anxiety** *--* The French call the orgasm [*la petite mort,*
]{.s1}the little death. Since the ego is extinguished in the full
orgasm, it is experienced by the ego as a little death. In [*Love and
Orgasm'* ]{.s1}Lowen wrote, "The intimate psychological connection
between sex and death is the symbol of the round or the cave, which
represents both the womb and the tomb. Orgasm anxiety, that is, the fear
of ego dissolution that overwhelms the neurotic individual at the
approach of the full sexual climax, is perceived as the fear of dying."

**Orgastic impotence:** The absence of orgastic potency. By damming up
of biological energy in the organism, it provides the source of energy
for all kinds of psychic and somatic symptoms. See *orgastic potency*

**Orgastic potency:** The capacity for complete surrender to the
involuntary contraction of the organism and com­plete discharge of the
sexual excitation in the acme of the sexual act. It is always lacking in
neurotic in­dividuals,' according to Reichian theory.

**Orgastic Potency** *Orgastic potency is the capacity for surrender to
the flow of biological energy without any inhibition, the capacity for
complete discharge of all damned-up sexual excitation through
involuntary pleasurable contractions of the body."* (ibid, page 79) *"A
further characteristic of orgastic potency is the ability to focus
temporarily the entire affective personality on the genital experience
despite any conflicts."* (Reich, W. 1927/1980. Genitality In the Theory
and Therapy of Neurosis. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, page 32.
\[Originally published 1927 with the title, The Function of the Orgasm.
This is an entirely different book than the 1942 book of the same
name\]).

**Orienting reflex**:[  ]{.Apple-converted-space}An instinctual pattern
of bodily and mental response to anomaly 

**Orgasm reflex:** The unitary involuntary contraction and expansion of
the total organism seen when it is at rest and energy flow is
uninhibited. Also seen at the acme of the sexual act.

**Overcharged** refers to the experience of having too much energy
charged up in the body to flow optimally. Overcharging can be
ameliorated by discharging. 

**Ouroboros.** The ancient Egyptian and Greek symbol of a
world-encircling snake that swallows its own tail. The ouroboros
symbolically represents the world of the newborn, which is an
all-inclusive, wholly immanent sphere. See *immanent, life- world,
transcendent. *





**Painter, Jack, W. PhD --** Jack W(hitfield). Painter, Ph.D.
(1933-2010), born in Tennessee (December 5, 1933), one of the Eastern
states of the U.S.A. grew up on the farm of his parents (German mother).
He started out studying civil engineering, then changed his subject and
studied philosophy, psychology and literature at the University of
Atlanta. He received his Ph.D. in Philosophy, Literature and Psychology
from Emory University in Atlanta in 1961. Became bursary Smith-Mundt and
pursued post-universitary training in Europe.  Later he served as a
Professor at the University of Miami where like several other
contemporary university professors -- searched to reach beyond mere
intellectual knowledge by experiencing directly and personally..... he
undertook research in physio-philosopy and psychology and took interest
in different approaches -- massage, acupuncture, Zen, yoga, the work
of Ida Rolf and her Rolfing method, Gestalt therapy developed by Fritz
Perls, and the theories of Wilhelm Reich in the form of Vegetotherapy.
For years he was associated with the Wilhelm Reich Institute in Mexico,
collaborating with Rafael Estrada Villa, MD and Blanca Rosa Anorve. By
the seventies he was calling his form of holistic bodymind bodywork
'[Postural
Integration](https://www.bodymind-integration.com/postural-integration/){target="_blank"
rel="noopener noreferrer"}'. In the eighties and nineties Painter then
went on to develop two further methods, [Energetic
Integration](https://www.bodymind-integration.com/energetic-integration/){target="_blank"
rel="noopener noreferrer"} and [Pelvic-Heart
Integration](https://www.bodymind-integration.com/pelvic-heart-integration-heart-in-sexuality/){target="_blank"
rel="noopener noreferrer"}. He died in Mill Valley (CA), on June 28,
2010 at the age of 76. See *Postural Integration, Energetic Integration,
Pelvic-Heart Integration*.

**Parallelism --** The thesis that for each physical state there is a
corresponding mental state and that the mental states are connected
among each other in the same way that the physical states are connected
among each other.

**Parentification** -- The process of role reversal whereby a child is
obliged to act as parent to their own parent or sibling. In extreme
cases, the child is used to fill the void of the alienating parent's
emotional life.

**Path** -- Carl Jung believed each person had a distinct and proper
path of development unique to his or her particular life. This path was
realized through a more or less balanced dialogue between the conscious
and unconscious aspects of awareness.

**Pathwork** -- a body of practical spiritual wisdom transmitted by Eva
Pierrakos that lays out a step-by-step journey into personal
transformation and wholeness, down to the very core of our being,
offering guidance and advice for self-development and personal growth.
It is a voyage of discovery to the Real Self through the layers of our
defenses, denial and fear. See E*va Pierrakos, John Pierrakos, Core
Energetics, Core Strokes*

**PBSP:** Pesso-Boyden System Psychomotor, See *Pesso*

**Pelvic Release --** Deep Holistic Bodywork after Jack W. Painter,
furthered by Dirk Marivoet, with focus on releasing the pelvic area,
which in the female pelvis---with sexual trauma, periods, birth, and
menopause---is not handled well in our society. Men also have pelvic
restrictions, from different origins. Pelvic Release helps both women
and men, to free and balance the very cradle of life. The pelvic
diaphragm is one of the keys to orgastic potency. Only when this
supporting hammock can pulse and vibrate and participate in the
expression of core emotions is full contact with oneself and one's lover
possible. Often the floor of the pelvis have become weak and immobile,
but overexercising the muscles of the pelvis (p. c. pump) may also lead
to a rigidity. These muscles need to be relaxed, yet strong and active.
The anus holds deep anger against authority, the genitals hold
narcissistic neediness --- armor that has its origins in the anal and
genital phases of infantile development. For both men and women there is
often a compensatory interplay between the armor of the anus and
genitals. The anus is often squeezed to give force to the genitals, or
if the anus is open and receptive the genitals are hidden and
energy-less. The work includes:

- Hands-on certainty and technique review for all the major muscle
  groups
- Assessments and techniques for posterior and anterior pelvic floor,
  psoas complex, and diaphragm
- Common perinatal biomechanical issues explained
- Postural patterns and their effect on pelvic health
- Handling fibroids, pelvic pain, diastasis recti, and scar repair
- Expanded anatomy of bones, ligaments, deep muscles, pelvic floor
  fascial layers





**Pelvic-Heart Integration --** A method of Bodymind Integration,
developed by Jack W. Painter, Ph.D., furthered by Dirk Marivoet and
Elisabeth Renner, that focuses on the various dimensions of sexuality
and love, dimensions which are biologically connected to the pelvis and
the heart. See *Postural Integration, Energetic Integration, Core
Strokes*

**Pendulation --** Pendulation is the natural movement between states of
expansion and states of contraction that occur in your NS. It is a basic
principle of organic life, seen in ebb and flow, motion of bird wings,
cycle of seasons. A resilient NS can move back and forth, between action
and rest and digest without getting stuck in either extreme. Pendulation
also introduces "resourced" (safe) states to develop confidence in your
NS to move between inverse states.





**Persona --** (Latin, "actor's mask"). One's social role, derived from
the expectations of society and early training.

**Personality --  **Characteristic attitudes and behavioral reaction
patterns based on temperament and experience.

**Personal unconscious --** Jung's term for what Freud called the
unconscious (i.e., repressed material) in contrast to archetypes, that
are presumed never previously to have been conscious. See *archetypes,
collective unconscious*

**Pessimism --  **Philosophical doctrine that pain is the essence of
life, as expounded by Schopenhauer.

**Pesso, Albert --  **The co-creator, along with his wife Diane
Boyden Pesso, of Pesso Boyden System Psychomotor, a widely respected
interactive technique that helps clients create new memories to
compensate for emotional deficits in the past. See *PBSP*

**Phenomenology --** For Heidegger, t he study of how things "show up"
or manifest themselves (not to be contrasted with Ontology). For
Husserl, the study of conscious experience, or appearance as opposed to
reality (to be contrasted with Ontology). See *ontology*

**Pierrakos, John, C. MD --** John Pierrakos (February 8, 1921 --
February 1, 2001) was an American physician and psychiatrist. A student
of [Wilhelm
Reich](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_Reich "Wilhelm Reich"), he
developed [bioenergetic
analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bioenergetic_analysis "Bioenergetic analysis"){.mw-redirect},
a form of
mind-body [psychotherapy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psychotherapy "Psychotherapy"),
with his then-colleague [Alexander
Lowen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Lowen "Alexander Lowen") (December
23, 1910 -- October 28, 2008). Pierrakos was the founder and director of
the Institute of Core Energetics (1973-2001), co-founder of the
Bioenergetics Institute in New York, NY with Lowen (1955-1970), and
co-founder of The Pathwork Center, Phoenicia, NY, in association with
his wife, [Eva
Pierrakos](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eva_Pierrakos&action=edit&redlink=1 "Eva Pierrakos (page does not exist)"){.new}.
(Source Wikipedia)

**Pierrakos, Eva --** Eva was born in 1915 in Vienna, the daughter of
the well-known Austrian novelist Jakob Wasserman. Driven by a private
curiosity and a desire for deeper understanding of her world, Eva began
to develop the gift of accessing an inner voice, at first through
automatic writing and later by speaking in a trance state. In time the
inner voice took shape as the authoritative, insightful, and loving
persona of the **Pathwork®** Guide. She pursued the development of her
gift with great devotion and perseverance, learning to listen and follow
her guidance. Eva considered her ability to give spiritual guidance and
to help people in their self-development as her life task. Eva came to
the United States in 1939 and continued her work in New York, giving
Guide sessions and an ongoing series of trance lectures. She was a
beautiful, vibrantly alive woman with a keen intelligence who enjoyed
life in all its aspects. She loved people and animals and enjoyed food,
skiing, swimming, and dancing. In 1971 she married psychiatrist John C.
Pierrakos, one of the founders of Bioenergetics and later, [Core
Energetics](https://www.bodymind-integration.com/core-energetics/). The
energetic work became an essential part of the Pathwork and contributed
to its expansion. Eva Pierrakos died in 1979, leaving behind her the
rich legacy of more than two hundred [Guide
lectures](https://pathwork.org/the-lectures/), two flourishing Pathwork
centers, and thousands of students and followers of the teachings. For
more on Eva's life read her book [The Path to the Real
Self. ](https://pathwork.z2systems.com/np/clients/pathwork/product.jsp?product=105&catalogId=2&)Source
<https://pathwork.org/eva-pierrakos/,> See *John Pierrakos, Pathwork*

**Pilot:** Al Pesso's term for "The designation of the highest order of
ego processes, the aspect [with which the therapist makes an
alliance]{.s1}. In touch with both affective and cognitive content, but
often unaware of soul energies expressed in the body, the pilot
functions as the [coordinating and choice-making center of the
personality"]{.s2}.[The Pilot is like a unique, separate aspect of our
self that looks upon us and assesses the what and why of our
actions. ]{.s1}Neurological research is now very clear on the point that
the brain structures of the right orbital (behind the eyes) pre-frontal
cortices are responsible for the regulation of emotionally-based
behaviour. According to Allan Schore [the brain structures occupying the
orbital pre-frontal areas of the right brain only mature with
experience.The Pilot is one's ability to think and reason in a mature,
reliable and consistent manner. The Pilot detects what one is feeling,
thinking, experiencing, and what actions are in their best interest. To
have a strong Pilot, one needs to have had their inner world of
interests, talents, feelings, values, and dreams seen, validated, and
acknowledged by parents, caregivers, and loved ones. If this did not
occur, then we may not know who we truly and authentically are. This
leads to a cloudy or murky picture of our self and prevents us from
seeing the world accurately, making good decisions, or being intimate
with others. See *Pesso*]{.s1}

**Play --** A physical or mental leisure activity that is undertaken
purely for enjoyment or amusement and has no other objective. Play
physiologically is only possible when both the ventral-vagal (social
engagement) system and the sympathetic (doing) system are simultaneously
activated. This allows play to be both adventurous and active, and also
very social. If someone is say accidentally hit with an elbow during
play, they will not get (very) upset if the ventral vagal tone is
strong, but they will get very upset, involuntarily, if the ventral
vagal tone is weak, even if intellectually, they 'know better.'

**Pleasure anxiety:** Translation of German *Lust Angst*. The fear of
pleasurable excitation. Pleasure anxiety manifests in the body as a
general anxiety about every form of vegetative sensation and excitation
or the perception of such excitations and sensation. 

**Pleasure principle:** That the primary orientation of life is toward
pleasure and away from pain. The Pathwork Guide says whoever blocks
pleasure blocks the deep connection with the spiritual self. There is no
split between a spiritual and a sexual being. See Eva Pierrakos

**Polyvagal Theory --** The term "polyvagal" combines "poly," meaning
"many," and "vagal," which refers to the important nerve called the
"vagus." Influential theory in Trauma Therapy and Body Psychotherapy
developed by Stephen Porges, PhD.

**Positive Intentionality --** According to the Pathwork Guide, "To move
into the attitude of positive intentionality you need to cultivate a
deep inner certainty that the abundance and creative power of the
universe transcends every limitation. You can create a positive attitude
toward life according to a lawful, integrative process of transformation
that makes you totally self-responsible. To make it work you need to
adopt a trusting attitude toward yourself and life. Anchored in your
good will, knowing that the power is yours, you can **expose your
negative intentionality**. Otherwise it is impossible to transform it.
As you become free of your negative intentionality, you are no longer
devastated by that of others. You will become open to love, in the
awareness that the universe is a rich and joyous place in which you are
at home."

**Posture --**  As nouns the difference
between **attitude** and **posture** is that **attitude** is the
position of the body or way of carrying oneself; while **posture** is
the way a person holds and positions their body. As verbs the difference
between **attitude** and **posture **is that **attitude** is to assume
or to place in a particular position or orientation : to pose;
while **posture** is to put one's body into a posture or series of
postures, especially hoping that one will be noticed and admired. See
*Postural Integration, Core Strokes, Body Reading, Attitude*

**Postural Integration (PI) --** is a method of deep holistic bodywork
that integrates a client's physical, emotional, and mental (cognitive)
aspects. It uses tissue manipulation to explore and
release *postural* patterns leading to the transformation of negative
emotional and psychological patterns or behaviours. PI
was developed in the 1970s by Dr Jack W. Painter. "Postural* Integration
is not only a specific process that I have developed, it is a unique,
holistic synthesis -- it is a singular approach to the whole being --
not just a collection of methods of breathing, deep bodywork, Gestalt,
Reichian work and movement awareness. All these aspects are facets of a
central view of the individual as an energetic élan exhibiting physical,
emotional, and cognitive dimensions which are all part of an energetic
wave." (in "*Deep Bodywork and Personal Development"*). *Its ultimate
goal is to achieve personal change and transformation. Painter distanced
himself from classifying his method as "therapy" in the clinical sense
or "psychotherapy", stating it was bodymind or mindbody work. See *Jack
W. Painter, Bodymind Integration*

**Power --** The ability or capacity to do something or act in a
particular way. It has a deeper meaning than we can imagine. In the
personality it has to do with strength of mind, moral qualities of a
person, power of his/her faith and so on. See *higher self, Mask Self,
leadership*

**Power vs. Vulnerability --** [  ]{.Apple-converted-space}In content,
the soul consists of many polarities, one of which is power vs.
vulnerability. Power is the capacity to move, to act, to transform, or
make an effect upon the world. Vulnerability is the capacity to feel, to
respond, to take in the world. See *Soul*

**Precosmogonic chaos --** (implicitly feminine) -- Habitable order is
created out of *pre-cosmogonic chaos* at the beginning of time. Genesis
1, which presents the idea that a pre-existent cognitive structure (God
the Father) uses the Logos, the Christian Word, the second Person of the
Trinity, to generate habitable order out of pre-cosmogonic chaos at the
beginning of time. It is in that Image that Man and Woman are created
--- indicating, perhaps, that it is (1) through speech that we
participate in the creation of the cosmos of experience and (2) that
what true speech creates is good. It is a predicate of Western culture
that each individual partakes in some manner in the divine. This is the
true significance of consciousness, which has a world-creating aspect.

**Pressure Exercises.** These bioenergetic exercises may be used to deal
with people whose voices are particularly choked off by (cmt) in the jaw
or throat. The exercise generally engages the person in making a loud
vocalization (yelling or screaming) as the therapist applies pressure
with his fingers and thumbs to the tense muscles of the jaw and neck.
Alexander Lowen maintains that the scream is a major form of releasing
tension, whether the tension is from fear, anger, or intense
frustration. See *bioenergetics, core-energetics, Lowen, Pierrakos*

**Pride --** The first cardinal sin as explained in the Pathwork is
PRIDE. Pride is always a compensation for feelings of inferiority and
inadequacy. That the effects of your pride must lead to separateness is
self-explanatory. Among the needs of the idealized self are, for
instance, the need for glory, the need to triumph, the need to satisfy
vanity or pride. See *idealized self.*

**Principle of reciprocity --** A bioenergetic principle based upon the
assumption that the energy moving the "machine of life" is fundamentally
the same energy, unifying the psychic and physical functioning of the
body. The energetic processes of the body determine what goes on in the
mind just as they determine what goes on in the body. See
*bioenergetics*

**Proprioception --** Immediate, non observational perception of one's
own body.

**Protoself --** The **protoself** with its primordial feelings, and the
**core self**, constitute a "material me." The **autobiographical
self**, whose higher reaches embrace all aspects of one's social
persona, constitute a "social me" and a "spiritual me." We can observe
these aspects of self within our own minds or study their effects in the
behavior of others. In addition, however, the core and autobiographical
selves within our minds construct a knower; in other words, they endow
our minds with another variety of subjectivity. For practical purposes,
normal human consciousness corresponds to a mind process in which all of
these self levels operate, offering to a limited number of mind contents
a momentary link to a pulse of core self.' See *self*

**Pseudo-solutions --** Adaptations to survive or compensate for the
deficits of our childhood. A pseudo‑solution means a rigid rule one
adheres to, regardless of the circumstances or the issues. It is a blind
reflex reaction. We find *submission and dependency* as pseudo-solutions
for Love, *aggression and control as distortions of* Power, or
detachment and *withdrawal* as substitutes and caricatures for Serenity.
Underneath withdrawal is confusion and chaos, loneliness, pain.
Underneath control and aggression is collapse, helplessness, pain.
Underneath submission is aggression, fear and frustration, pain. See
*pathwork*

**Psyche --** Freud used an iceberg metaphor to describe the psyche;
nine-tenths of the self -- the older self -- floats below the surface of
consciousness, and one-tenth is visible above. Jung was fond of a
perhaps more organic metaphor: he saw the psyche as an ancient tree, the
living blossoms and flowers of which must trace their origins -- and
their secret sustenance -- to gnarled archaic roots, long enduring, deep
within the earth. Psyche includes both the ego and the Dynamic Ground,
both consciousness and the unconscious. Psyche is seen as fundamentally
bipolar, having both a center of agency in consciousness (the ego) and a
deep core (the Dynamic Ground). See *deep psyche, Dynamic Ground, ego,
ego system, psychic core, unconscious. *

**Psychoanalysis --** A talking treatment method for eliciting and
understanding the psychology of unconscious emotional experiences and
representations. The method reveals the unconscious structures that
organize emotional experience. The word also refers to a theory of human
emotional development.

**Psychodynamics --** This is a broad concept referring to the
psychological operations that govern thoughts and behaviors and of which
the individual may not be consciously aware. In particular, from a
therapeutic perspective, the psycho-dynamic tradition described the
presence of wishes in the context of relationships (for example to be
more assertive) that may lead to fears of the response of others (for
example being rejected) or of response of self (for example, remaining
passively silent). These patterns are seen as arising from early
experiences.

**Psychoeducation --** Information in which the content is psychological
or psychiatric in nature.

**Psychopharmacology --** The treatment of mental illness with classes
of medications that include the following

- ****[***Anxiolytics*--**-compounds that possess anti anxiety effects
  to relieve emotional tension.]{.s1}
- ****[***Antidepressants*--**-agents from a number of different classes
  used primarily to relieve depression although often useful in treating
  other symptoms.]{.s1}
  - [***Monoamine oxidase inhibitors*--**-medications that inhibit the
    degradation of monoamine oxidase in the brain thereby elevating
    levels of available biogenic amines.]{.s1}
  - [***Tricyclic antidepressants*--**-compounds that increase the
    availability of multiple neurotransmitters, (e.g., norepinephrine)
    in the brain.]{.s1}
  - ****[***Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors*--**-medications
    that promote greater synaptic availability of the neurotransmitter
    serotonin. ]{.s1}
- ****[***Hypnotics*--**-different classes of compounds (e.g.,
  benzodiazepines) used to induce sleep. ]{.s1}
- ****[***Mood stabilizers*--**-multiple types of medications that
  reduce or prevent mood lability and associated symp- toms in affective
  disorders (e.g., bipolar disorder). ]{.s1}
- ****[***Antipsychotics*--**-different classes of medications that
  target many types of malfunctioning neurotransmitter systems such as
  the dopamine system and relieve and prevent symptoms of
  psychoses. ]{.s1}

**Psychosexual --** Based on Freud's early finding that all aspects of
mental functioning are affected by infantile sexual development and the
wishes that derive from these experiences. The term is usually used as
an adjective to imply that some mental or behavioral action is
influenced by oral, anal, phallic, or genital urges.

[**Psychosexual stages of development:**]{.s2} in relation with the
libido points to the progressive advancement of modes of obtaining
sexual pleasure linked with the excitement of the (-\>) erotogenic
zones, starting from mouth and anus, and finishing with the genital one.

There are actually four stages: oral, anal, phallic and genital. For
each stage correspond specific modes of obtaining pleasure.

**Psychosis.** A mental state characterized by loss of reality testing
as in delusions and hallucinations, often accompanied with severe
interferences with the capacity to meet the ordinary demands of life,
maintaining social and personal boundaries, manage profound levels of
anxiety, focus attention, and experience pleasure.

**Psychotherapy:** The name for various methods of psychological
treatment. Most psychotherapeutic treatment may be traced to three basic
assumptions. (1) human behavior is conditioned chiefly by emotional
considerations, and that self-awareness or understanding is necessary to
modify human behavior. *(2)* a significantly large part of human emotion
and behavior, which it stimulates, is not normally conscious; instead it
is rooted in the non-conscious levels of human functioning. (3) clinical
evidence indicates that a process, which makes available to individual
consciousness, the significance of conflicts and tension (in the
unconscious,) will produce personal awareness, stability and emotional
control.

**Pulsation**.  Impulses and sensations are biological actions of the
total organism (including the plasma system). These are present in the
living system long before the development of an organized nervous
system.In Reichian therapy the rhythmical interchange between expansion
and concentration; in biological systems, such interchange shows a
greater emphasis in the expansion phase, which corresponds to the desire
of expressing oneself. Reducing or blocking pulsation are the basis of
pathology: Reichian therapy supports the contracted and blocked organism
to pulse again naturally. Protozoa demonstrate fundamentally the same
actions and impulses as metazoa, in spite of the fact that they do not
have an organized nervous system. Pulsations are "pumped" along the
length of the body by various diaphragms, muscular groupings, and
tissues through the body's cavities, tubes and pouches. Healthy
pulsation propagation normally occurs with supple expansions and
contractions. See *Expansion, contraction*

**Purification --** The process of making things aware and conscious so
that every current and attitude in the soul that is contrary to divine
law can be eliminated. Self[‐]{.s1}realization, or
self[‐]{.s1}actualization, mystical ascent or reaching your spiritual
center [‐‐ ]{.s1}or whatever other name one wishes to use in order to
describe the goal of all living [‐‐ ]{.s1}cannot occur unless one faces
one's deepest negativities and hypocrisies, the deliberate intent to be
negative and destructive, spiteful, and resentful, often to the degree
of foregoing one's own happiness just to punish someone of your past.
The aim is spiritual reunion to help towards a reunification of
everything that has ever split off. Purification is necessary on many
levels such as feelings, understanding, knowledge. Purification involves
work on all levels of personality (body, emotions, mind, will and
spiritual work), including to face your lower self, your real guilts,
and to make restitution for them, to purify yourself. To recognize again
and again whatever is wrong in your inner reactions, to separate good
motives from the wrong ones and thus to cultivate that very change you
wish to accomplish. Perfectionism, self-condemnation, moralizing, false
guilt feelings on the contrary are dangerous. It is the purpose of the
path of purification not only to sense, what your basic light is like
--- for it is not the same with everyone --- but it is of utmost
importance to realize that self-will, pride, and fear exist in you, to
what degree, how they interact, how one is dependent of the other. It is
utter illusion to hope, consciously or unconsciously, that facing these
aspects of your being can be avoided, skipped, by[‐]{.s1}passed, or
whisked away by some magic "spiritual" means. Purification is also
unthinkable without receiving active help. It is too difficult alone.
**Carl Jung** in Mysterium Conjunctionis refers to **Dionysius the
Areopagite** (("is supposed to have lived on transition from 5th to 6th
century" ) mentioning the characteristics of the mystical
ascent:  *emundatio* (κáθaρις,
'*purification*'), *illuminatio* (φωτισμός), *perfectio* (τελεσμός). Dionysius
refers the purification to Psalm 51 : 7 (AV): "Wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow"; and the illumination to Psalm 13 : 3 (AV): "Lighten
mine eyes." (The two heavenly luminaries, sun and moon, correspond on
the old view to the two eyes.) The perfection he refers to Matthew 5 :
48: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect." Here we have one aspect of the approximation to divinity. See
*pathwork*








**Rationalism --** Austere and misleading belief that we can use reason
to search out "the truth." (Nietzsche)

**Reactive Acting-Out --** An inability to tolerate the level of charge
and the feelings experienced. We discharge the intolerable
energy/feelings in chaotic movement, unconscious action, behavior, and
vocalizations. Reactions are an inability to contain. This is an attempt
by the person to "discharge" the excess energy. Reactions are different
from feelings. Reaction is an inability to contain. Reactive Acting-Out
is an attempt by the organism to return to the level of charge to which
they are accustomed. See *charge, containment, discharge*

**Reality principle.** The manner in which the ego carries out its work
based on a perception and measurement of social reality demands. The
tendency for an organism to orient itself to practical social dictates
and requirements. See *ego, social causality*

**Reconstruction.** Recovery and formulation of past events to gain
understanding of hidden meanings.

**Real Self** -- According to the Pathwork, the real self is a complex
of everything you are at the moment. It is our higher self seen as our
true identity. [The real self exudes and transmits a vital ]{.s1}flow of
[energy, the life force, consciousness. ]{.s1}Spiritual truths can often
be expressed only in paradoxes: So defined, the real self is both our
actuality and our potentiality. We are already our real selves
underneath the layers of confusion, fear, and error. Yet the real self
is also the potentially perfect self, the state we attain when these
layers have been transformed and eliminated. Our real self lives in
unity, having never left that divine state. We call it real in contrast
to our disconnected aspects that are in illusion. (From The Glossary of
Pathwork Concepts). The Pathwork Guide says: *"**Whenever you act out of
your real self, you are in complete unity with yourself. There is no
doubt, no confusion, no anxiety, and no tension. You are not concerned
with the appearance of your act in the eyes of others, or about
principles or rules. You are concerned with the effect of your action on
others and on yourself and with its consequences; and you choose this
particular alternative because, even though you recognize its
imperfections, it still seems better to you than another alternative. It
corresponds to your innermost nature."* (PGL94). See *False Self*

**Reframe --** A common therapeutic procedure that involves changing the
valence of a reported event from negative to positive without changing
the facts.

**Regression --** Denotes a return to an earlier, more developmentally
primitive mode of mental functioning.

**Regression --** A shift in the organization of mental functioning to a
more developmentally immature level, often occurring defensively in the
context of anxiety associated with higher- level functioning but also
seen in sleep and dreaming, love and sex, esthetic and religious
experiences, and psychoanalytic treatment.

**Reich, Wilhelm, MD --** (born March 24, 1897, Dobrzcynica,
Galicia, Austria-Hungary \[now in Ukraine\]---died Nov. 3, 1957,
Lewisburg, Pa., U.S.), Viennese psychiatrist who developed a system
of psychoanalysis that concentrated on overall character structure
rather than on individual neurotic symptoms. Considered as one of the
founding pioneers of body-oriented psychotherapy.  His idea of muscular
armor---the expression of the personality in the way the body
moves---shaped innovations such as body psychotherapy, Gestalt
therapy, bioenergetic analysis and primal therapy. See *bioenergetic
analysis, gestalt therapy, body psychotherapy, armor*

**Reichian Therapy --** A name given to Wilhelm Reich's Character
Analytic Vegetotherapy. (See Vegetotherapy.) See *Reich*,
*vegetotherapy*

**Re-initialization of defenses** -- Concept from trauma therapy -- The
aim is to help the patient re-mobilize reactions that were repressed at
the time the traumatogenic situation happened, to reconnect with the
defensive and orientation responses that could not be expressed at the
time, and to enable those reactions to surface. See *Defenses*

**Remapping** -- The creation of antidotal symbolic events during
therapy sessions which may offset the life negating, negative patterns
of perception and response created by traumatic events. See *Pesso,
Memory*

**Resourcing --** Resourcing is engaging the body to increase regulated
nervous system states. One can cultivate **internal resources** through:
imagery, somatic tracking, breathing, movement, sound, or touch.
**External resources** through nature, animals, creativity, play, and
safe interpersonal connection. Inviting your body-mind to attune to
sensations of safety that are available in the present moment. The
process of attending to a feeling of safety teaches your NS that it can
experience stress and then return to a state of calm. There are infinite
ways to resource: grounding, affirmations, nourishing relationships,
creative imagery.

**Repression.** A form of defense in which unacceptable urges and
materials are kept outside the realm of consciousness.

**Resistance.** A defense aimed towards keeping the unconscious material
activated by analysis or psychotherapy from reaching consciousness. In
Core Energetics resistance is seen as the refusal to be grounded. See
*grouding*

**Resources --** In Bodymind Integration a focus exists on work with
both internal and external resources. Internal resources: Strength,
agility, intelligence, inherited talents, resilience, instinctual wisdom
of the nervous system. [External resources: nature, spiritual practice,
expressive arts, dance, movement, jumpstart warming-ups, music, etc.
]{.s1}

**       PERSONAL RESOURCES-**

1.  The Will to Heal
2.  Being a good life manager
3.  Your own capacities (eg. Awareness, curiosity, courage, discernment,
    compassion, prudence, hope, humor, love resourcefulness, resiliency,
    strength, persistence, trust
4.  Caring people in your life
5.  Good physical health and energy
6.  Money
7.  Healthy spirituality
8.  A caring partner
9.  Help with your various needs (your healing team)
10. Living in balance

       Other resources -- Containment, centering, boundaries,

**Resurrection of the body.** The enlivening of the body that
accompanies the reawakening of the power of the Ground in adulthood.
Nonplenipotent psychic energy here gives way to the power of the Ground
in its plenipotency, and the body, thus charged with high-intensity
energy, returns dramatically to life. Initial signs of the body's
awakening may include such indications as tingling sensations,
palpitations, perspiration, chills, horripilation, heightened
sensitivity in erotogenic tissues, and spontaneous erotic feelings. More
dramatic expressions of the body's awakening are for example, sensations
of energy movement, dismantling of body armors, involuntary bodily
movements and postures, vocalizations, and strong sexual feelings. See
*plenipotent*.

**Role-playing.** There are many settings in which acting the part of
another person for educational or therapeutic purposes proves helpful.
For example, employees may be trained, via role-playing, to handle
problems with customers, to present an impressive sales pitch, to learn
how best to interact with their superiors or subordinates, and so forth.
In therapy, clients may rehearse ways to cope with stress and family
conflicts.

**Ropiness.** A tissue texture change characterized by a cord- or
rope-like feeling.





**Sacred marriage (*hieros gamos*) --** The integration of male and
female principles, indicating spiritual fulfillment. This sacred
marriage can also be conceived as the integration of the ego and the
Dynamic Ground. See *self*

**Secondary drives --** For Wilhelm Reich, these are the violent,
destructive and perverse impulses created by the transformation of
natural primary drives when the latter attempt to break through armoring
in order to express themselves. *Primary drives* are innate drives (e.g.
thirst, hunger, and sex), whereas secondary drives are learned by
conditioning. In Core Energetics secondary drives are part of the Lower
Self. Secondary drives are trapped underneath the muscular armoring.
Secondary drives arise from the natural primary drives that are
distorted by muscular holding and the concomitant psychopathology. When
they emerge, the person believes they emerge "spontaneously" from within
and some think their expression a completely natural thing, considering
them equal to every other genuine and spontaneous expression of man's
nature.  They are however our negativity coming to the surface. We must
not skip or bypass our negativity if we want to heal. See *primary
drives.*

**Segment --** Wilhelm Reich's view that muscular armoring runs
side-to-side across the body and divides the body into functionally
limiting segments. Each segment represents functional areas of the body
where blockages of energy flow can occur. See *blocks*

[**Segmental Armoring --** ]{.s1}Wilhelm Reich's term to indicate that
in humans, a segmental arrangement of groups of muscles that reflects in
its functioning the primitive form development of animal life.  By
relating such segmentation to expressive movement and emotion, it is
possible to appreciate the development of structure out of function in
human beings. The actual relationship between form development and
selective pressures in evolutionary terms is an interesting question to
be dealt with in another context. Segmental armoring serves as a defense
against pain, unfortunately by distorting the body's natural energetic
flow and pulsation. It results in a decreased ability to experience
pleasure. See *natural energetic flow, pleasure*

**Self --[  ]{.Apple-converted-space}**[According to Albert Pesso,
t]{.Apple-converted-space}he self represents **everything that we are
psychologically.** The self is **built in distinct steps** grounded on a
protoself (a term from Antonio Damasio). The first step is the
generation of primordial feelings, the elementary feelings of existence
that spring spontaneously from the deep core of the psyche and seat of
nonegoic psychic potentials. At the outset of life we are radically open
and, consequently, receptive not only to a wide range of external
stimuli but also to a wide range of energies, impulses, feelings, and
images arising from the Dynamic Ground within. A lifelong see-saw
dynamic between the larger Dynamic Ground and the developing
**individual self**, who at birth is immersed comfortably in the larger
(oceanic, etc.) Ground, then gradually develops an identity of *body* as
separate (with *biological instincts,* which generate impulses in
response to target stimuli, prompting corresponding object-related
behaviors; *emotive potentials,* which give rise to powerful body-based
feelings; and *an autosymbolic imagination,* which projects preencoded
images upon genetically selected stimuli as they appear within the field
of perception. Later develops a *mind* as its own, and then as an adult,
bumps up against its own limits in so identifying. Now we find a self
(an **"inner self"** with a **core self or true self (also higher self),
a lower self and a mask self**) as substances of our **autobiographical
self**. Our whole self involves will and action---specifically, about a
relationship on the interface between our own ego steered organism and
the[  ]{.Apple-converted-space}3-dimensional world. The development from
infancy to adulthood inevitably involves traumas that later limit the
flexibility in this 3-dimensional world. In the effort to transcend
those limits (to become more effective in concrete goals like work,
friendships and family) the ego meets opportunities to transcend itself,
and so to open up again to the always present Dynamic Ground. This is
the experience we adults have called transpersonal, transcendental, or
spiritual "selves". See s*elf-negation, self-destructive attitude,
self-expression, self-assertion,*

**Self --** According to Michael Washburn, with a **lowercase s**, this
term is used to designate the ego's understanding of itself as defined
by the self-representation. With an **uppercase S**, the term is used to
designate the power of the Ground in its highest expression as
transparent Spirit. This usage of Self differs from C. G. Jung's,
according to which the Self is an archetype rather than a power or
energy, namely, the archetype governing the general course of
development, guiding it toward the telos of wholeness. *See integration,
self- representation, transparent Spirit.*

**Self-Awareness -- [  ]{.Apple-converted-space}**As humans, according
to the existentialist view, we are capable of self-awareness, which is
the distinctive capacity that allows us to reflect and to decide. With
this awareness we become free beings who are responsible for choosing
the way we live, and we influence our own destiny. This awareness of
freedom and responsibility gives rise to existential anxiety, which is
another basic human characteristic. The greater our awareness, the
greater our possibilities for our awareness in the following areas:

- We are finite and do not have unlimited time to do what we want in
  life.
- We have the potential to take action or not to act; inaction is a
  decision.
- We choose our actions, and therefore we can partially create our own
  destiny.
- Meaning is the product of discovering how we are "thrown" or situated
  in the world and then, through commitment, living creatively.
- As we increase our awareness of the choices available to us, we also
  increase our sense of responsibility for the consequences of these
  choices.
- We are subject to loneliness, meaninglessness, emptiness, guilt, and
  isolation.
- We are basically alone, yet we have an opportunity to relate to other
  beings.
- We can choose either to expand or to restrict our consciousness.
  Because self-awareness is at the root of most other human capacities,
  the decision to expand it is fundamental to human growth. Here are
  some dawning awarenesses that individuals may experience in the
  counseling process:
- They see how they are trading the security of dependence for the
  anxieties that accompany choosing for themselves.
- They begin to see that their identity is anchored in someone else's
  definition of them; that is, they are seeking approval and
  confirmation of their being in others instead of looking to themselves
  for affirmation.
- They learn that in many ways they are keeping themselves prisoner by
  some of their past decisions, and they realize that they can make new
  decisions.
- They learn that although they cannot change certain events in their
  lives they can change the way they view and react to these events.
- They learn that they are not condemned to a future similar to the
  past, for they can learn from their past and thereby reshape their
  future.
- They realize that they are so preoccupied with suffering, death, and
  dying that they are not appreciating living.
- They are able to accept their limitations yet still feel worthwhile,
  for they understand that they do not need to be perfect to feel
  worthy.
- They come to realize that they are failing to live in the present
  moment because of preoccupation with the past, planning for the
  future, or trying to do too many things at once.

**Self-regulation** describes the assumption that our bodily expressions
are naturally self-regulating based on the intensity of our feelings.
That means, our feelings act as a biofeedback mechanism for us to let us
know, what -- and how much -- is right, too much or too little. This is
an automatic process. This is a biological and organismic event. It has
much to do with our ability to reach out and make contact. It also has
to do with our ability to withdraw and create boundaries for protection.
Self-regulation is guided by our instinctual, autonomic programming to
go for pleasure and to avoid pain. ("Pain principle", "pleasure
principle").

**Self-representation --** The image the subject has of him or herself
based on his or her own interpretation. According to Michael Washburn, a
component of the ego system, the self-representation is the ego's
implicit conception of itself. begin thinking about itself. The
self-representation of an evolving self-developing soul, continuously
changes, is revised and reforged, split in two, mended, de-animated,
reduced, re-animated, divided, re-emerged, regenerated, incorporated
with strengths, integratied with new insights, deep wisdom, emerging
heart qualities like compassion and love, accepted and integrated lower
self/shadow aspects as new lifestyles, circumstances and fashions are
explored. Over the years as the ego is given more *definition*,
*justification* (the self-representation is a good enough
self-representation), and *motivation* (the inspiring motivation of the
ego ideal and the disciplining motivation of the superego), the full ego
system is formed and integrated. Traits, tendencies, and psychic
potentials that are incompatible with the self-representation, are
repressed and hidden from consciousness in the shadow (a negative
worldly identity). At times new superego is formed, self-will is
steadfast exercised and possible new self-representations, new identity
possibilities and ego-ideals are explored and lower potential selves are
purified and integrated and higher selves.

**"Self space"** -- A term used by many teachers to mean a space you
create like a bubble around yourself and what ever activity you are
doing will be contained in your "self space". It feels safer to these
more disconnected children. Some of the self space activities that work
as intervention for these children are classically more "soft
techniques". See *soft-techniques*

**Self-Will** -- In the Pathwork this refers to the will of the little
self, the little ego. Self-will strives to get what it wants, regardless
of the consequences, regardless of harm that may be done to others and
therefore ultimately also to the self. Only, the little ego is too blind
to understand this. And self-will in its blind and immature state is
equally too blind to realize that what is desired against spiritual law
must bring hardship and imprisonment to the self. See *little self,
little ego*.

**Sense --**
[As** **]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}[[[noun]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}:
a) A]{.luna-pos}]{.css-1gxch3 .e1hk9ate2}ny of the faculties, as sight,
hearing, smell, taste, or touch, by which humans and animals perceive
stimuli originating from outside or inside the body:[My sense of smell
tells me that dinner is ready. b) T]{.luna-example .italic term="dinner"
linkid="nn1ov4"}hese faculties collectively. c) Their operation or
function; sensation. d) a feeling or perception produced through the
organs of touch, taste, etc., or resulting from a particular condition
of some part of the body:[to have a sense of cold.
[As ]{style="text-decoration: underline;"}]{.luna-example
.italic}[[[verb]{style="text-decoration: underline;"} (used with
object),]{.luna-pos}]{.css-1gxch3
.e1hk9ate2}[ [sensed,]{.luna-inflected-form .bold} [sens·ing. a)
T]{.luna-inflected-form .bold}]{.css-t9jmot .e1hk9ate3}o perceive
(something) by the senses; become aware of. b) To grasp the meaning of;
understand.

**Sensation --** This is the language of the deeper self because it
leads to the felt-sense more than any other sense. It is through
sensation that we know how to regulate the self (hand on the hot stove)
without thinking (neocortex, and therefore guide our lives rather than
control (neocortex). Our senses get dulled by obedience (neocortex).
Sensation is the language of the body, the unconscious, which is most of
who we are.

**Separation--individuation --** Developmental process elaborated by
Mahler in which the infant progressively emerges from the symbiotic
unity with mother and forms a sense of individual selfhood and a sense
of differentiation from love objects. The subphases of this process
include "hatching" (differentiation), practicing, rapprochement, and "on
the way to object constancy".

**Serenity --** A state of being calm, peaceful and untroubled.
Achieving this positive state of mind means you won't feel as troubled
by life's ups and downs. See *higher self, mask self*

**Sexuality --** The *sexual* force is an expression of
consciousness** **reaching for fusion. Fusion, which one can also call
integration, unification, or oneness is the purpose of Creation.
Whatever term one uses, the final aim of all split-off beings is to
reunify the individualized, separated aspects of the greater
consciousness with the whole. The developmental nature of our sexuality
in its initial stages as infants is selfish. Sexuality is a force that
matures in stages in us as healthy adults in love relationships of
mutuality and Union. Sexuality, as a healthy and natural component of
the Life Force, with maturity, integrates with Eros and Love.  Without
this integration and maturity the sexual force remains an immature,
instinctual, and often unmanageable force within us. See *eros, love*

**Shadow --** a Jungian concept, consists of the traits, tendencies, and
psychic potentials that, in being incompatible with the
self-representation, are repressed and hidden from consciousness. The
personal shadow consists of the traits, tendencies, and potentials that
are incompatible with the self-representation as it is first forged
during early childhood and then later restructured during early
adulthood. The archetypal shadow consists of the traits, tendencies, and
potentials that, in bearing the stigma of absolute evil, are most deeply
repressed. Derepression of the personal shadow occurs during adolescence
and can occur again at midlife. Derepression of the archetypal shadow
occurs during regression in the service of transcendence. See
*derepression. *

**Shamanism** -- is one of many means through which humans have
communicated with aspects of the psyche lying beneath normal awareness.
One technique it uses to help people recover a sense of well-being is
called **soul retrieval**, whereby lost, stolen, or damaged aspects of
people's souls are retrieved and re-integrated into their bodies by the
shaman, thereby restoring their sense of wholeness (Pratt, 2007;
Ellenberger, 1970). This integration of parts and the resultant
increased wholeness it produces is not unlike the phenomenon of
**wholeness** Jung (1961/1963, 1957/1969, 1983) spoke about as a result
of the individuation process. Shamanism could be seen as a precursor to
modern analytic psychology, for many aspects of its methods can be
identified therein.

**Short-term memory.** Maintaining a limited quantity of information in
memory for a brief period of time.

**Sin(s)** --"to miss the mark" or "to err" (Derived from the
term ***hamartia*** -- from the Greek ἁμαρτία, from
ἁμαρτάνειν *hamartánein*). The Pathwork distinguishes **seven cardinal
sins**: The first cardinal sin is **PRIDE**. Pride is always a
compensation for feelings of inferiority and inadequacy. The effects of
pride lead to separateness. [The second cardinal sin is **COVETOUSNESS**
--- greed.]{style="font-size: 18px;"}[  If you covet something you do
not possess you blind yourself. The third cardinal sin is **LUST**.  It
means any kind of passionate desire, whether or not it has to do with
sexuality, which is indulged in a spirit of egocentricity or
isolation. The fourth cardinal sin is **ANGER**. Rather than feeling
your vulnerability, which seems an inferior place. Anger lifts you above
the true position you find yourself in --- that of being hurt. The fifth
cardinal sin is **GLUTTONY**. The deeper meaning of gluttony has to do
with need. A need that is unfulfilled and frustrated for a long period,
that is thwarted again and again, will seek outlets. Such an outlet,
among many other possibilities, may be gluttony. The sixth cardinal sin
is **ENVY**. The seventh cardinal sin is **SLOTH**. Sloth is
indifference and apathy. See *pride*, ]{style="font-size: 18px;"}

**Skepticism** -- The claim that we lack knowledge in a given domain or
in general.

**Slow work --** Slow work allows a person to become aware, to explore,
to disentangle issues, to recognize, to integrate, associate. The
slowness of the work facilitates the analysis of each feeling, image or
affect. This work makes it possible to leave the frozen response, of
frozenness of the organism's underlying structures, to gradually get
involved again in defensive and orienting responses.

**Social Causality --  Causality** (also referred to as causation, or
the relation between cause and effect) is influence by which one event,
process or state (a cause) contributes to the production of another
event, process or state (an effect) where the cause is partly
responsible for the effect, and the effect is partly dependent on the
cause. **Social causality** reflects a social mechanism rather than a
physical one. Because causality is one of the central notions in our
conception of the world, we think of the things and events we experience
as connected, and causal relations between them is perhaps the most
important connection. Thoughts of causation are central to how we think
about our own actions, thoughts, responsibilities and
relationships. **Causation** relates to moral and legal rules. Human
society exercises social control and keeping society functional by
enforcing rules. For rules to work society and the individuals in it
must be held accountable for their actions. all societies excluding
animalistic ones have a concept of causality. Causality imposes moral
obligations. Social causality involves not only physical causality, but
also epistemic variables such as freedom of choice, intention and
foreknowledge.

**Soft techniques** in Bioenergetics are techniques to work with
someone‟s energy that would be gentle and less assertive, i.e.: eye
movements and breathing.

**Somatic Centering --** Method of Deep Holistic Bodywork, developed by
Jack W. Painter, PhD, furthered by Dirk Marivoet, MSc. The goal of
Somatic Centering on the physical level means encouraging a fine inner
vibration which is organized along the diaphragms of body balance: the
cranium, mouth, first rib, thoracic hinge, breathing diaphragm, floor of
the pelvis, knees and ankle joints. The person is helped to deeply
release the "core of the body" (on all dimensions of the personality --
body, emotions, mind/thoughts, will, spirit). On the emotional level
help is given simultaneously with the bodywork, to recognize the most
stubborn patterns of character armor and develop basic strategies for
working with these enduring patterns. See *Postural Integration, Core
Strokes*

**Somatic transference --** has been referred to as the somatic
reactions the patient has toward her therapist and the term **''somatic
countertransference,'**' to the somatic reactions a therapist has toward
her patient at a particular moment during treatment (Dosamantes-Beaudry,
1997, p. 522). Later the definition became: ''Somatic transference''
refers to the totality of the patient's bodily-felt experience and
enacted behavior (experienced as bodily-felt sensations and expressed
via bodily-felt expressive movement and through kinesthetic and kinetic
images) that function as transitional objects for the patient and
provide critical relational psychodynamic meaning that at the outset of
treatment is unknown to the patient.(Dosamantes-Beaudry, 2007)

**Soul --** According to Albert Pesso, "everything that is," = being
itself = God. As humans, we are differentiated from everything that is
and everything that we are is called "soul." Soul is **"everything that
we are."** [The soul, is more inclusive than ]{.s1}the "self," which
represents everything that we are psychologically.[  ]{.s1}[The soul is
also more inclusive than ]{.s1}the ego, which represents that set of
psychological functions that mediates between the self that I am and the
outside world, with all the representational mappings that help us
survive and navigate ourselves through the world.[ ]{.s1}

If we think of the soul as having a shape (Plato said the Soul is a
circle with a center and a circumference), then the perfectly fitting
ego would provide the perfect countershape. Such an ego would perfectly
represent the soul as it surrounds and contains it. If the shape of the
soul is represented by the action of the body, then the countershape of
the ego is first experienced in the touch and action of the parents'
bodies in relation to that action, as well as in their acceptance,
naming and defining of the action. See *Self, Ego*

**Soul energies --** According to Albert Pesso, *t*here are [three such
soul energies that are important to track: ]{.s1}**sexuality,
aggression, and compassion,** [**or the need for justice** ]{.s2}(what
Redish calls [**the intrinsic reward of "fairness"** ]{.s1}(pp.211-226).

- [**Sexuality**]{.s3}[ **is that genetically inherited soul energy that
  is about the** ]{.s4}[**survival of the species.**]{.s5}[ This energy
  can be appropriated (which is to say, metaphorically elaborated upon)
  by the ego for other purposes, such as creative endeavors and as I
  mentioned earlier, for bonding. However, we assume its primal function
  is for the survival of the species. ]{.s4}
- [**Aggression**]{.s3}[ **is soul energy used for the**
  ]{.s4}[**survival of the self.**]{.s5}[ If I'm attacked, I need to be
  able to defend myself. **Self assertion** would be an example of
  socially approved aggression. ]{.s4}
- [**The need for justice, or compassion**]{.s3}[, is about the
  ]{.s4}[**survival of the group**]{.s5}[. We are group, or pack,
  animals and there are a whole host of energies that appear to be
  "hard-wired" into our brains to serve behaviors and attitudes that
  strengthen the group that we are a part of.]{.s4}

These cosmic forces of high energy cannot be stopped or killed. However,
they can be distorted and misdirected due to our attempts to avoid the
anxiety, which may arise. When this happens, we create negative
intentions and become frozen into the defensive structure. This
structure becomes a part of our personality with which we
identify. These are the kind of **"soul" energies** Pesso is identifying
that the pilot is not usually aware of. See *Pilot*

**Spirit --** The life force is said to be the impetus that we must
experience in our bodies, the body being the vehicle for our emotion,
thought, and *spirit*.

**Spiritual therapy --** A form of treatment based on six tenets of
transcendence of soul and spirit---love of others, love of work, love of
belonging, belief in the sacred, belief in unity, and belief in
transformation. See *Soul, Spirit,* *Core Energetics*

**Splitting --** is a defense mechanism that entails **"splitting off"
from the current experience**. It is also known as a **dissociating**.
It can also mean that the person "splits" their view of themselves or
another as "all bad" or "all good" without the ability to maintain the
fuller picture of the reality of the situation. According to **Marion
Solomon** *"Splitting occurs as the child comes to believe there are
"bad" things inside that must be gotten rid of. These are split off from
awareness. They may be consciously forgotten and not allowed to grow or
develop. They survive but are denied and hidden away in the unconscious.
Such feelings may include envy, hatred, fear of dependency, loss of
identity, etc. Love and rage, good and bad, may become polarized, with
only one or the other allowed into consciousness. Much energy must be
directed toward keeping these feelings from coming into conscious
awareness and finding places to lodge them safely."* (1989, p. 87)

**Spontaneous behavior or expression --** Behavior which contrasts with
learned behavior. In mature humans a spontaneous expression is a direct
and efficient expression of an impulse. It may be thought to be a direct
manifestation of the inner self. See *Inner Self, Mask Self, Lower self,
Higher self, Expression*

**Spontaneous movement --** The body's movement in which the in­
voluntary component is well-integrated with the voluntary component.
Spontaneous movement accounts, to a large extent, for what may be
perceived as aliveness in the movement.

**Stress --** Stress is defined as a nonspecific response of the body to
any demand made upon it. The body's stress response is often referred to
as its "fight or flight" response, where the body releases hormones such
as adrenaline and cortisol. This hormonal cascade increases your heart
rate and quickens your breathing, readying your body to fight off the
source of stress. And while the stress response is vital to keeping us
alive in times of physical stress --- say, being chased by a bear ---
prolonged psychological stress can start to harm the body. Chronic
stress can manifest in the body physiologically. Over time, emotional
stress can impact the immune system, energy metabolism, and other
important functions in the body. Prolonged stress is associated with an
increased risk of heart disease, depression, obesity, and even cognitive
disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.

**Stress positions --** In bioenergetics, stress positions are designed
to promote the confrontation of the individual with his or her
structure, and the repressed emotions holding it together. The most
common position is standing upright, knees slightly bent, weight on the
centre to outside of the feet, belly relaxed (the "grounded" position);
then fists pushed into the middle of the back (to open the chest
region}; and head up and chin pushed slightly forward (assertion of the
right to be/feel). This simple backward arch is one of the beginning
stress positions; if the muscles are rigid or tense, the body cannot
arch properly. See *bioenergetics, Core Energetics, confrontation*

**Stringiness --** A palpable tissue texture abnormality characterized
by fine or string-like myofascial structures.

**Style of life --** A concept reflecting the organization of the
personality, including the meaning individuals give to the world and to
themselves, their fictional final goal, and the affective, cognitive,
and behavioral strategies they employ to reach the goal. This style is
also viewed in the context of the individual's approach to or avoidance
of the three tasks of life: other people, work, love, and sex.

**Superficial Self** -- other word for *Mask Self, False Self, Idealized
Self Image or Unreal Self*. Covers the Real Self. Self-confidence
established through the idealized self is artificial.

**Superego --** The psychological structure that represents the
internalization of the parents' values and prohibitions and consequently
those of the larger social cultural world. The mental structure that
creates and maintains ideals, moral standards, values, prohibitions, and
commands. It observes and evaluates the self's compliance with these
ideals and generates affects to encourage compliance. It generates the
affects of guilt and shame.

**Supervision --** A relationship between a supervisor and a therapist
to help the therapist more effectively engage in a purposeful
relationship with a client or patient.

**Symbol --** The best possible expression for something essentially
unknown. Symbolic thinking is non-linear, right-brain oriented; it is
complementary to logical, linear, left-brain thinking.

**Synchronicity --** The relatedness of two events solely on the basis
of their meaning to an individual, in the absence of any possible direct
or indirect causal relation. This relatedness was held by Jung to be in
some sense objective, how- ever, and not merely in the mind of the
individual(s) perceiving the meaning. Pathologically: ideas of
reference.





**Teleology --** Purposiveness, end directedness.

**Temperament --** Inborn reaction propensities composed of stimulus
sensitivity, latency time, intensity of response, and dominant affect
elicited.

**Therapeutic alliance --** The necessary condition for the progression
of the psychodynamic work, consisting of an alliance between the
patient's higher developmental ego processes and the therapist's
facilitating analyzing ego, which alternately signifies the patient's
capacity for empathic attunement and active involvement in a joint
effort toward the overcoming of the patient's emotional conflicts, and
further activates the patient's ability to work cooperatively and
purposefully toward the accomplishment of the therapeutic goals.

**Therapeutic relationship --** See *therapeutic alliance*

**Titration --** a concept that has been borrowed from chemistry, means
meticulous regulation of the quantity of discharge energy at every
moment, in order to control the return of traumatogenic experience, and
in order not to replace a renegotiation of the traumatic experience by a
traumatic cathartic replay. Titration is the concept of "less is more"
-- the precept that working slowly, and with small amounts of traumatic
experience or sensation, is a safe and gradual way to process and
renegotiate trauma. The **"trauma vortex"** is a metaphor that describes
the whirlpool of overwhelming sensations and emotions that are often a
result of traumatic experience. Titration is an inherent aspect of the
**"healing vortex"** -- the counterbalance that supports the mastery,
choice, and resourcefulness that are a part of healing.

**Topographical model.** An early model of psychoanalytic theory
developed by Sigmund Freud which characterized mental phenomenon as
being unconscious or conscious in postulated functions in a relationship
to these qualities of mental life. This thinking included the ideas of
systems unconscious, preconscious, and conscious. see *ego, superego,
unconscious*

** Transcendent --** going beyond ordinary limits; surpassing;
exceeding. superior or supreme. Theology (of the Deity) transcending the
universe, time, etc.

**Transference-countertransference --** Particular cases of projection,
commonly used to describe the unconscious, emotional bonds that arise
between two persons in a therapeutic relationship.

**Transparent Spirit --** The awakened power of the Ground once it
ceases being to any degree other in relation to the ego and becomes the
ego's higher Self: the ego's higher will, wisdom, and love of others.
Transparent Spirit corresponds to the stage of integration. See
*integration, power of the Ground, Self.*

**Transpersonal therapy --** Humanistic approaches that accent spiritual
and transcendent dimensions of psychological well-being.

**Treatment contract --** The conscious and explicit understanding
between the therapist and the patient, which includes the number,
frequency, and duration of sessions, the clinical foci of treatment, the
roles of the patient and therapist, and the planning for contingencies
such as illness, lateness, missed sessions, and acceptable and
unacceptable contact for out of session and off hour emergencies and
behavioral expectations, such as substance abuse.

**True Self --** James Masterson quotes D. Winnicott (Post-Freudian
Psychoanalysts). "What is there that could be named a true self? A
self-representation that is whole, both good and bad and based on
reality, that is creative, spontaneous, and functioning through the mode
of self-assertion to regulate self-esteem in an autonomous fashion."
(1981, p. 107) Winnicott used true self to describe a sense of self
based on spontaneous authentic experience and a feeling of being alive,
having a real self. See *Essential Self, Real Self*

**Trust --** The inherent association with a sense of goodness in
oneself and life. Feeling resourced, the individual feels empowered, and
with empowerment comes stability, settling, a solidity. Settling becomes
the dominant relationship between oneself and others, as opposed to
activation.[ ]{.Apple-converted-space}With that, there is an ability for
higher degrees of containment, irrespective of the degree of activated
discharge in a given challenge.[ ]{.Apple-converted-space}





**Unconscious --** Used both as a noun to describe hidden aspects of the
mind and as an adjective to describe mental content that is not
available to conscious awareness. **Freud** originally believed that the
unconscious was a dynamic system within the mind that contained contents
and activities representative of the drives that had never been
conscious. Characteristics of the unconscious are that there is no
negation, contradiction, or ambivalence and that unconscious thought
follows idiosyncratic associative paths rather than logical connections.
Although the unconscious is not available to direct inspection,
derivatives can be seen in dreams, in slips of the tongue, and
disconnected thoughts. Current psychoanalytic theory argues that aspects
of psychic structure involving adaptation to reality, defenses, and
moral judgement are unconscious. Mental content may also become
unconscious through the operation of defenses against the experience of
intrapsychic conflict. (See *consciousness, defense mechanisms). ***C.
G. Jung** identifies two fundamentally different systems of
unconsciously motivated response in the human being. One he terms the
**personal unconscious**. It is based on a context of forgotten,
neglected, or suppressed memory images derived from personal experience
(infantile impressions, shocks, frustrations, satisfactions, etc.), such
as Sigmund Freud recognized and analyzed in his therapy. The other he
names the **collective unconscious**. Its contents---which he calls
archetypes---are just such images as that of the hawk in the nervous
system of the chick. No one has yet been able to tell us how it got
there; but there it is! See *Jung, collective unconscious, images*

**Undercharged** -- refers to the experience of having not enough energy
charged up in the body to flow optimally. see *bioenergetics*

**Ungrounded** -- refers to the experience of not being able to be fully
in the reality of the present moment. This can occur when someone's
energy is not flowing optimally due to holding, leaking, overcharging,
undercharging, splitting, etc. See *grounding, holding, leaking, charge,
splitting*

**Ungroundedness** means the loss of connection to our bodies and the
loss of the wisdom the body provides as to how to live life. Being
grounded allows a much clearer perception of reality since a grounded
person is less defended, more stable, and better able to connect to the
world as it is. See *grounding*

**Unmet Needs** -- A state of emotional deprivation which occurs  when a
person does not have one or more of  the basic emotional needs met
adequately during their childhood. See *basic needs*





**Vegetotherapy --** Reich's therapy in which the mobilization of
feeling through breathing and other body techniques activate the
vegetative centers of the body and liberates vegetative energy. See
*ANS*, *energy, Reich*

**Vibration --** A muscular experience. The aim of many bio­ energetic
exercises is to achieve vibrations as a means of releasing muscular
tension. These are in­voluntary spasmatic movements in the muscles,
caused by increased circulation and an increased energy flow throughout
the muscle. See *bioenergetics*

**Vicious Circle --** Psychologically speaking, a vicious circle is a
**self-perpetuating, repetitive pattern of negative, destructive,
illusory attitudes which intensify one another.** It originates in an
image or misconception which separates us from the reality of a
situation; as the vicious circle progresses, we get further and further
away from correcting the original mistake. Take, for instance, somebody
who has the misconception that the only way to defend himself against
being hurt by others is to make them afraid of him. Even if he initially
did not elicit hostile feelings, in his endeavor to frighten others he
will certainly evoke them. This hostility will make him more threatening
and tyrannical and he will use all new evidence to reconfirm his
original misconception. Finally he is bound to have some unpleasant
experience, which he will interpret as the result of his not having been
"strong enough." Thus he remains a prisoner of his vicious-circle and
goes through the same experience again and again. See *Pathwork, Core
Energetics, Image*





**Will --** Core Energetics tries to teach people to use their positive
inner will, the will of the heart, to live in the present, and have
choice in each moment to create their own lives. In the Pathwork a
distinction between the Outer Will and the Inner Will is made. The inner
will comes entirely from your higher self (from the solar plexus). The
outer will comes partly from the intellect and partly from superficial
soul regions. The outer will is often motivated by immature feelings,
desires, reactions, and reasonings. The inner will is impeded because of
the images, wrong conclusions, and misconceptions one carries in ones
conscious and unconscious mind. The more the inner will is hindered, the
more one tries to make up for it by strengthening the outer will. But
the strength of the outer will is always unhealthy. It is a poor
substitute, full of tension, anxiety, and impatience. 

**Window of Tolerance --** Concept used in trauma therapy -- Siegel
(1999) defines a window of tolerance that facilitates sensory awakening
by allowing the return of sensory information (paralysis, feelings of
numbness, rigidity, hyper-agitation, irritability, turbidity of
wakefulness/sleep), in a modulated way, without waking up terror
associated with the traumatic experience. See *Trauma*

**Wisdom --** The combination of experience and knowledge, with the
power of applying them or soundness of judgement in a person. See
*knowledge, higher self*

**Witness Figure --**  A PBSP hypothetical construct posited as a
benign, caring figure who sees the emotions one shows on one's face and
body, gives them a name and places that emotion in the context that
produces that emotion.  The naming of the emotion is done by the
therapist -- who hopefully can accurately assess what is showing
visually -- but posited as a third figure in the room. See *PBSP*

**Working memory --** A type of short-term memory, often referred to as
the "blackboard of the mind," most often anatomically associated with
the prefrontal cortex, that facilitates moment to moment perception,
information processing, and explicit memory retrieval.

**Working through --** The process of applying insights from
psychoanalysis to many different areas and to the working out of new
compromise formations.

**Worldview --** Frame of reference based on a particular set of values
and beliefs.



